Open Government Partnership
Meeting of the Inter-Departmental Committee
10:00am – 11:00am, Friday 19 August 2016
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Meeting Room 6, Level 4, One National Circuit, Barton

MINUTES

1. Overview and update
PM&C provided an update on Australia’s process to join the Open Government Partnership (OGP) to date and outlined next steps to finalise our first National Action Plan, including:

submitting the National Action Plan to the Open Government Partnership by 1 November 2016 and the key final dates to meet this timeframe; 

focusing over the next two months on identifying where we can lift the ambition of the proposed commitments; and

working in close collaboration with civil society, including, but not limited to the Australian Open Government Partnership Civil Society Network, building on earlier consultations.  

2. Consultation and stakeholder engagement
PM&C noted that co-drafting the National Action Plan with civil society is an essential aspect of the OGP, and updated IDC members on the establishment of a joint government-civil society Interim Working Group to assist with this process, including:

tabling a draft Terms of Reference for the Interim Working Group, and outlining the timeframes to finalise membership (aiming for 26 August 2016); and

noting senior government representation would be sought, reflecting the Government’s commitment to the OGP process.

PM&C noted that IDC members would be engaged throughout this process to provide feedback on proposed commitments relevant to their agency. Key agencies would be approached regarding participation on the Interim Working Group.

The IDC also discussed timeframes for implementation of the National Action Plan.



3. Proposed commitments for the National Action Plan 
PM&C noted the IDC would play an important role in helping identify potential commitments to lift the ambition of the National Action Plan. IDC members were asked to review the list of proposed commitments put forward by stakeholders and come back with views on areas that may be worth further exploring.

The IDC discussed that this would be Australia’s first National Action Plan and is intended to provide a foundation for further engagement with civil society, with new initiatives identified over time.

PM&C clarified that at this stage, it is expected that commitments will be funded from existing operational budgets in relevant government agencies.

Members discussed whether PM&C had already evaluated the list of commitments and had views on the direction of the National Action Plan. PM&C clarified that in the first instance it would rely on IDC members and civil society stakeholders to report back on the viability and feasibility of the proposed commitments. 

Action: IDC members will review the list of proposed commitments from stakeholders and provide comments to OGP@pmc.gov.au by COB Thursday, 25 August 2016.

4. Other business
PM&C updated members on the upcoming Open Government Partnership Global Summit, to be held in Paris, France in December 2016.

The next IDC meeting is on Friday, 16 September 2016.
.
