****** Efforts to date ******
The Australian Government has already taken a range of steps towards improving
transparency, integrity and anti‑corruption in recent years, which this
National Action Plan will build upon.
Open data and digital transformation of government services are high priorities
for the Government and considerable progress has been made in a short space of
time.
    * The Public Data Policy Statement, released in December 2015, commits
      Australian Government entities to release non-sensitive data as open by
      default. Since 2013, the number of discoverable resources on data.gov.au
      has grown from approximately 500 to over 20,000.
    * TheDigital Transformation Agency(formerly the Digital Transformation
      Office) has been established to lead the online transformation of
      government services, and provide an integrated policy and strategic
      capability for whole of government ICT, ICT procurement and digital. The
      Digital Transformation Agency will implement wide scale change in digital
      capability across government departments, benefiting the public and other
      users of government services.
There have been several major initiatives to improve accountability and
integrity both within and outside of government.
    * The Government commissioned an independent review of the parliamentary
      entitlements system in August 2015, and has given its in-principle
      support to all of the recommendations of the review.
    * TheRoyal Commission into Trade Union Governance and Corruptionreported in
      December 2015. The Government has introduced legislation to improve the
      governance and accountability of registered organisations (unions and
      employer organisations).
Steps have been taken to make government procurement more transparent, and to
encourage innovation by making it easier for start-ups and innovative small
businesses to sell services to government.
    * The National Innovation and Science Agenda committed to establish a new
      Digital Marketplace for procuring ICT products and services, and seeking
      innovative solutions to policy and service delivery “challenges” through
      the Business Research and Innovation Initiative.
    * A public ICT dashboard is being developed to improve transparency around
      Government ICT performance and progress on major new investments.
The Australian Government has also been active (and in many cases a leader) in
international anti‑corruption and tax avoidance / transparency efforts.
    * Australia is a key member of the G20 Anti-Corruption Working Group,
      having led the development of the G20 Anti‑Corruption Action Plan and the
      subsequent 2015-16 Anti‑Corruption Implementation Plan. The G20 High
      Level Principles on Beneficial Ownership Transparency are also a legacy
      item of Australia’s 2014 G20 presidency.
    * Australia was also an active participant in the UK’s international anti-
      corruption summit in London in May 2016. At the meeting, the Government
      endorsed the Global Declaration against Corruption and announced a range
      of new measures, including joining the Extractive Industries Transparency
      Initiative and holding an annual government business roundtable on
      corruption.
    * In December 2015, the Australian Taxation Office published the first
      annual Report of Entity Tax Information, which included the Australian
      total income, taxable income and tax paid of large public and private
      companies operating in Australia.
    * The Voluntary Tax Transparency Code, announced as part of the 2016-17
      Budget, is a set of principles and minimum standards to guide medium and
      large businesses on public disclosure of tax information. Adoption of the
      Code is voluntary, and is designed to encourage greater transparency
      within the corporate sector.
These new measures build on other actions taken over the last decade to improve
access to government information and promote transparency and integrity at the
federal level:
    * Whistle-blower protections in the public sector were significantly
      improved by the Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013, which commenced in
      January 2014.
    * Freedom of information laws were reformed in 2010, and included the
      introduction of the Information Publication Scheme (IPS), which requires
      Australian Government agencies to publish a broad range of information on
      their websites.
    * The Office of the Australian Information Commissioner was established in
      2010 to promote access to government information.
    * The Archives Act 1983 was amended in 2010 to reduce the period before
      which government information and Cabinet documents are released. A
      Digital Transition Policy and Digital Continuity 2020 Policy have also
      been established, requiring government information to be created and
      managed digitally.
    * Creative Commons licensing was adopted in 2010 to accommodate access to
      government information and bring consistency to licensing arrangements.
State, territory and local governments have also undertaken a range of
initiatives to promote transparency, integrity and access to information at a
sub-national level.

[ a govspace site ]
