****** 1.2 – Beneficial ownership ******
We will consult with the corporate sector, non-government organisations and the
public on a beneficial ownership register for companies.
Objective
Australia will work to improve transparency of information on beneficial
ownership and control of companies available to competent authorities.
Status Quo
Improving transparency around who owns and benefits from financial arrangements
is key to protecting the integrity of our financial systems and preventing the
misuse of financial entities for corruption and criminal activity. A beneficial
ownership register shows who ultimately benefits from the activities of
companies.
Australia currently has tracing powers for beneficial ownership of listed
companies and investment schemes but there is room to strengthen these
provisions.
Ambition
To ensure that adequate, accurate and timely information on beneficial
ownership and control is available to competent authorities in Australia.
To improve regional and international cooperation on taxation, including
strengthening information sharing between tax authorities and sharing learnings
to increase the transparency of beneficial ownership information. We will use
outcomes of the work by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and the Global
Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes this year to
help develop proposals to improve implementation of relevant international
standards on transparency, including on the availability and exchange of
companies’ beneficial ownership information.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values of access to information and public
accountability by:
    * improving the effectiveness of our legal, regulatory and institutional
      frameworks;
    * preventing the misuse of financial arrangements for illicit purposes such
      as corruption, tax evasion and money laundering;
    * protecting the integrity of the financial system; and
    * increasing growth through private sector investment.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * Increasing Corporate Accountability
Timeframes
Recommendation to Government on improving transparency of information on
beneficial ownership of companies available to competent authorities by end
2017
Lead agency
Treasury
Other actors involved
Government:Attorney General’s Department , Australian Securities and Investment
Commission, G20, Australian Taxation Office, regional partners and Australian
Accounting Standards Board
Non-government: Companies, non-government organisations, reporting entities
under the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act, FATF,
Global Forum, international tax partners
Milestones
   1. Release a public consultation paper seeking views on the details, scope
      and implementation of a register of beneficial ownership of companies.
      The consultation will also consider:1) Recommendations by FATF and the
      Global Forum on proposals to improve the implementation of the
      international standards on transparency, including on the availability of
      beneficial ownership information and its international exchange.2) The
      use of nominee shareholdings to conceal beneficial ownership, including
      potential solutions.
          o End 2016
   2. Public consultation
          o End 2016 – Early 2017
   3. Recommendation to Government on the details, scope and implementation of
      a register of beneficial ownership of companies.
          o Mid 2017
   4. Recommendation to Government on other related areas of beneficial
      ownership transparency considered during consultation.
          o End 2017

[ a govspace site ]
