****** 5.2 – Enhance public participation in government decision making ******
We will work together to improve public participation in government decision
making for better policy development and service delivery outcomes.
Objective
Australia will work towards improving public participation and engagement to
enhance policy and service delivery outcomes for Australians.
Status Quo
Government is comprised of a diverse range of organisations, with approaches to
participation varying considerably across different departments and agencies.
High barriers to participation and piecemeal or unpredictable approaches to
consultation can lead to an inefficient and dissatisfying experience. The
current mechanisms for consultation, which are adapted from other online
processes, often do not fully meet the Government’s practical requirements for
policy and program development.  In addition, current mechanisms can be
ineffective in enabling ‘co-design’.
Numerous reviews have highlighted scope for improvement in the way the
Australian Public Service engages with the public when developing policies and
programs. For example, Peter Shergold’s Learning from Failure recommended that
“the APS should promote new forms of civil participation, including digital and
deliberative democracy techniques, in order to enhance consumer-directed care,
improve customer service, encourage greater public engagement and inform the
public economy”.
There is a need to identify and disseminate information on good practices and
help peer exchange between government agencies and across different levels of
government. Digital technologies also open up new opportunities for engagement
and there are a range of innovative techniques that could be further explored
at the Commonwealth level (e.g. policy hacks, online challenge platforms and
citizen juries). In addition, there has been a lack of investment in social
media and on-line tools relevant to public participation in government
decision-making.
The Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 also requires
Commonwealth entities to work cooperatively with others to achieve common
objectives, where practicable.
Ambition
To design and adopt a whole-of-government framework that embeds meaningful,
open, public and multi-stakeholder participation into the business of policy
development and service delivery.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values of transparency, accountability and
public participation by:
    *     o facilitating informed public participation;
          o improving policy development and service delivery;
          o enhancing transparency around government decision making;
          o encouraging an ongoing sharing of information and views across
            interest groups that builds consensus on broad policy directions;
            and
          o creating more engaged private and community sectors, and public.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * Improving Public Services
Timeframes
Late 2016 – July 2018
Lead agency
Department of Industry, Innovation and Science
Other actors involved
Government:All Commonwealth entities
Non-government: Research, not-for-profit and private sectors
Milestones
   1. Undertake and publicly release a stocktake of current approaches to
      public participation to determine best practice activities (including
      international and domestic examples, user experience research and
      relevant standards, such as IAP2).
          o Late 2016 –  Early 2017
   2. Work with government agencies, the public and organisations outside of
      government to develop and implement a whole-of-government framework (with
      guidance / principles and potential initiatives) for improving public
      participation and engagement across the Commonwealth.
          o Early – Mid 2017
   3. Undertake pilot public participation initiatives, including working with
      the Digital Transformation Agency to more effectively use digital
      channels for engagement.
          o Mid 2017 – July 2018
   4. Review processes and iterate as necessary.
          o Ongoing

[ a govspace site ]
