Potential commitments for the National Action Plan

At its last meeting, the IWG agreed to further develop and refine of a number of potential commitments. Updated draft text on the following potential commitments will be provided to members, and subject to agreement of the IWG, released for public comment:
Work towards compliance with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. 
Assess Australia’s compliance with the Open Contracting Data Standard.
Explore options for a beneficial ownership register for companies.
Improve whistle-blowers protections in the corporate sector, noting the Government’s commitment to improve protections for whistle-blowers who report tax misconduct to the Australian Taxation Office.
Establish metrics to assess public utilisation of information access rights.
Improve availability and use of public data, including identifying and releasing high‑value datasets to enable data-driven innovation, building public data infrastructure, and building and maintaining public trust on data sharing.

Draft text will also be provided to IWG members to facilitate discussion around the following:
Improve the discoverability and accessibility of government information.
Review and modernise information management and access laws.
Support government agencies to digitally transform high volume services.
Establish a permanent mechanism for OGP consultation during implementation of the National Action Plan.
Explore options to improve public participation and engagement in Commonwealth policy development and decision making.

Dr Coghill will provide papers to IWG members to facilitate deeper discussion on the proposals to enhance the national integrity system, including political party integrity and political campaign financing reform. 
Information will be provided to IWG members to facilitate discussion on Mr Timmins’ proposal for a commitment in the National Action Plan around the UN Sustainable Development Goals.

For discussion and agreement:

What are the commitments aiming to achieve and why? Is the scope and ambition appropriate? What milestones could be included? How do the commitments stack‑up against the criteria set out in the Interim Working Group’s Terms of Reference?


