****** 1.1 – Improve whistle-blower protections in the tax and corporate
sectors ******
We will improve whistle-blower protections for people who disclose information
about tax misconduct to the Australian Taxation Office. We will also consult on
other reform options to strengthen and harmonise whistle-blower protections in
the corporate sector with those in the public sector.
Objective
Australia will ensure appropriate protections are in place for people who
report tax evasion or avoidance, corruption, waste, fraud and misconduct within
the corporate sector.
Status Quo
The prevention of tax evasion or avoidance, corruption, waste and fraud relies
upon appropriate protections for people who report these wrongdoings.
Australian public servants who act as whistle-blowers already have significant
protection under the Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013 (PID Act). This is in
contrast to Australia’s corporate whistle-blower framework, which lags behind
the PID Act. Current protections are overly narrow and make it unnecessarily
difficult for those with information to qualify for protections.
A research project into public interest whistleblowing, Whistling While They
Work 2, led by Griffith University, is currently underway and looking into
improvements across the public and private sectors.
In the 2016-17 Budget, the Government announced it would introduce
whistle‑blower protections for people who disclose information about tax
misconduct to the Australian Taxation Office.
Ambition
To reduce tax evasion or avoidance, corruption, waste and fraud by protecting
people who report such activities.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values of public accountabilityand
transparency by:
    * encouraging, protecting and compensating whistle-blowers whose
      information reveals artificial tax structures and misconduct;
    * reducing tax misconduct and other forms of corruption, fraud and waste by
      ensuring whistle-blowers are protected from retribution; and
    * ensuring tax and corporate private sector whistle-blowers have similar
      protections to public sector whistle‑blowers.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * Increasing Corporate Accountability
    * More Effectively Managing Public Resources
Timeframes
December 2016 – December 2017
Lead agency
Treasury
Other actors involved
Government: Australian Taxation Office, Australian Securities and Investments
Commission, Attorney-General’s Department and other relevant agencies
Non-government: Board of taxation, tax advisors, law and accounting bodies,
non-government organisations and academia
Milestones
   1. Policy development to introduce tax whistle-blower protections and
      options to strengthen and harmonise corporate whistle-blowing protections
      with those in the public sector.
          o October – December 2016
   2. Public consultation on tax and corporate whistle blower protections
          o December 2016 – March 2017
   3. (i) Development and exposure of draft legislation for tax whistle blower
      protections.
      (ii) Recommendation to Government on reforms to strengthen whistle-blower
      protections in the corporate sector.
          o May – July 2017
   4. Finalisation of legislation for tax whistle-blower protections.
          o August – December 2017
 

[ a govspace site ]
