Potential commitments for the National Action Plan

a. Broader ambitions and goals

Civil society members have asked to explore broader ambitions/goals that could potentially be included in the National Action Plan. These broader ambitions could help frame commitments in the Plan, and also provide policy direction for the Government’s future efforts around open government. 

For example, it has been suggested that an ambition could be included around improving ethical behaviour in the corporate sector, with the potential commitments in this Plan around beneficial ownership, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and whistle‑blower protections being the first steps towards that goal. 

If the Interim Working Group (IWG) agrees, civil society members could draft possible text for further consideration out-of-session.


For discussion and agreement:

Would there be merit in including broader ambitions/goals in the National Action Plan? What types of ambitions could be considered?


b. Scope of potential commitments

At its last meeting, the IWG agreed to further discuss and explore the details of a range of potential commitments. 

Draft text will be provided to IWG members on the following potential commitments, which if there are no substantive issues, could be settled out of session:
Work towards compliance with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. 
Assess Australia’s compliance with the Open Contracting Data Standard.
Establish metrics to assess public utilisation of information access rights.
Improve availability and use of public data, including identifying and releasing high‑value datasets, building public data infrastructure, and enabling data-driven innovation.

Draft text will also be provided to IWG members to facilitate discussion around the following:
Improve whistle-blowers protections in the corporate sector, noting the Government’s commitment to improve protections for whistle-blowers who report tax misconduct to the Australian Taxation Office. 
Explore options for a beneficial ownership register for companies.
Building and maintaining public trust on data sharing.
Issues papers will be provided to IWG members to facilitate deeper discussions on the following matters:
Establish a permanent mechanism for OGP consultation during implementation of the National Action Plan.
Review and reform to information law and practice.
Enhancement of the national integrity system.

Other potential commitments the IWG has agreed to further discuss can be included on the agenda for the next meeting.


For discussion and agreement:

What are the commitments aiming to achieve and why? Is the scope and ambition appropriate? What milestones could be included? How do the commitments stack‑up against the criteria set out in the Interim Working Group’s Terms of Reference?


