Interim Working Group 
for Australia’s OGP National Action Plan
9:30am – 11:30am, Tuesday 13 September 2016
The Treasury
Langton Crescent, Parkes

MINUTES

Attendance list:
Dr Steven Kennedy (co-chair)
Ms Fiona McLeod (co-chair)
Mr Stein Helgeby
Mr Iain Anderson
Ms Meghan Quinn
Ms Anne Lyons
Ms Angelene Falk (via telephone)
Ms Elizabeth Tydd
Dr Ken Coghill
Ms Maree Adshead (via telephone)
Mr Peter Timmins (via telephone)
Mr Mark Zirnsak
Ms Katherine Szuminska
Ms Helen Owens
Mr Ryan Black
Ms Kayelle Drinkwater
Apologies: Mr Timothy Pilgrim (represented by Ms Angelene Falk)
1. Welcome and apologies

2. Recap from the last meeting
The co-chairs noted the Terms of Reference had been finalised and settled out-of-session. 
Members discussed the consultation approach to facilitate broader public engagement, including possible strategies to attract further public interest and potential ministerial engagement.

3. Update on consultation

Members provided an update from their respective networks, noting that there had been a good level of engagement but there is a need to provide stakeholders with more detail around commitments to encourage meaningful feedback.

Members agreed it would be desirable to publish draft commitments for public comment as they are developed , noting the drafts would be the work of the Interim Working Group and not considered or endorsed by the Government.  


4. Potential commitments for the National Action Plan
Members focused discussion around the draft commitment templates, and broadly agreed to the following potential commitments, but with some changes to further lift the ambition of the commitments and to clarify outcomes. Members nominated lead civil society members to work with the relevant agencies to update the following draft commitment templates out-of-session:
Work towards compliance with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (PM&C/Department of Industry, Innovation and Science and Mr Zirnsak).
Assess Australia’s compliance with the Open Contracting Data Standard (Department of Finance, Mr Zirnsak and Mr Timmins).
Explore options for a beneficial ownership register for companies (Treasury, Mr Zirnsak and Ms McLeod).
Improve whistle-blower protections in the corporate sector (Treasury, Mr Zirnsak and Ms McLeod).
Establish metrics to assess public utilisation of information access rights (Office of the Australian Information Commissioner, Information and Privacy Commission NSW and Mr Timmins). 
Improve the availability and use of public data, including identifying and releasing high-value datasets, building public data infrastructure, enabling data-driven innovation and working with civil society to build the social licence for data sharing (PM&C and Ms Adshead).
Action: relevant government agencies will consult internally and work with civil society leads to update the draft commitment templates as necessary.  
Members discussed the scope and details of the potential commitment to establish a permanent forum for OGP consultation during implementation of the National Action Plan. 
It was noted that there are a number of different models that could be pursued and that the finer details of the consultation mechanism may need to be settled after the Plan is completed.
Action: PM&C will work with Mr Timmins and Ms Szuminska to draft and circulate a commitment template on the permanent forum for OGP consultation.
Mr Timmins provided an update on the proposal to review and reform information access laws and practice. Government members agreed to further consider and consult on the proposal. 
Action: Attorney-General’s Department will further consider and consult on the proposal to review and reform information access laws and practice (with Mr Timmins), and report back at the next meeting.
Dr Coghill provided an update on the proposal to enhance the national integrity system and outlined potential changes to political campaign financing. Dr Coghill agreed to prepare a further paper on the proposal, identifying the gaps and problems with the current system for the next meeting.
Action: Dr Coghill will prepare a paper on the proposal to enhance the national integrity system for discussion at the next meeting.
Mr Timmins led a discussion on the possibility of linking the National Action Plan to implementation of the UN Sustainable Development Goals and our leadership role in the Asia-Pacific region.
Action: the secretariat will circulate information out-of-session on Australia’s progress in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals. 
5. Other business
Members discussed the possibility of holding a meeting outside of Canberra.
Members were also invited to contribute content to the OGP Australia blog.
