****** 4.3 – Open Contracting ******
We will undertake a public review of the Australian Government’s compliance
with the Open Contracting Data Standard.
Objective
Australia will review compliance with the Open Contracting Data Standard and
continue to support the Open Contracting Global Principles.
Status Quo
The Open Contracting Data Standard sets out key documents and data that should
be published at each stage of government procurement and is seen as the
international benchmark. The Standard enables disclosure of data and documents
at all stages of the contracting process by defining a common data model. It
was created to support organisations to increase contracting transparency, and
allow deeper analysis of contracting data by a wide range of users.
In line with the Commonwealth Procurement Rules, Australian Government entities
are required to report all procurement contracts with a value of $10,000 or
more on AusTender. However, there has not been a formal assessment of the
extent to which current practice meets the requirements of the Open Contracting
Data Standard.
At the UK Anti-Corruption Summit in May 2016, the Australian Government stated
its support of the Open Contracting Data Standard and noted the role that the
Standard could play in encouraging machine-readable open data formats across
all areas of government.
Ambition
To enhance transparency and accountability of public money in delivering public
contracts.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values ofaccess to information and public
accountability by demonstrating transparency and accountability in relation to
the procurement of goods and services on behalf of the Government.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * Increasing Public Integrity
    * More Effectively Managing Public Resources
Timeframes
February 2017 – August 2017
Lead agency
Department of Finance
Other actors involved
Government: All Commonwealth entities
Non-government: Transparency International Australia and Publish What You Pay
Milestones
   1. Undertake review of compliance with the Open Contracting Data Standard.
          o February – April 2017
   2. Publish review.
          o May 2017
   3. Receive public comment on the review.
          o May – June 2017
   4. Implement measures to improve compliance with the Open Contracting Data
      Standard (if required).
          o June – August 2017

[ a govspace site ]
