****** Australia’s leadership internationally ******
This National Action Plan focuses on domestic initiatives, but Australia also
plays an important role in promoting more effective governance in the Indo-
Pacific region and beyond.
We will continue to support countries in our region to build institutions that
promote stability, inclusive economic growth, poverty reduction and gender
equality. We will also maintain our support for strengthened dialogue between
governments, non-government organisations, the public and the private sector,
so that they can make legitimate demands of their governments.
Australia’s development cooperation program supports a diverse range of
countries, from highly populous Indonesia to the micro-states of the Pacific.
Australia therefore tailors its cooperation to address the varied economic,
political and social factors constraining effective governance in each country
context, including through:
    * reducing opportunities for corruption by strengthening checks and
      balances, access to information and complaints processes;
    * assisting partner governments to reform tax policy and administration and
      improve public financial management;
    * strengthening regulatory and legal environments so that businesses have
      greater certainty and predictability;
    * supporting the public and businesses to resolve disputes through formal
      legal systems, alternative mechanisms or institutions that combine both;
    * promoting gender equality and enhancing women’s voice in decision-making,
      leadership and peace-building; and
    * building coalitions and opportunities for discussion across government,
      business, non-government organisations and the public to improve public
      policy and government accountability.
Australia is committed to the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which includes the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development. The National Action
Plan will support the achievement of the SDGs in Australia and globally, in
particular Goal 16 on peaceful and inclusive societies, access to justice and
effective institutions. Australia strongly advocated for this goal, which will
be critical for the success of the entire 2030 Agenda.
Australia will also endorse the Joint Declaration on Open Government for the
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which commits us
to transparency, openness and accountability in our domestic and international
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
As a member of the Open Government Partnership, we also note our responsibility
to work globally to fight corruption, empower citizens and enhance transparency
and integrity. We will continue to work with other countries to help achieve
these goals, including through our support for the effective implementation of
the UN Convention against Corruption and the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative in Australia, our region and beyond. Australia will also continue to
participate actively in forums such as the G20 Anti-Corruption Working Group
and OECD Development Assistance Committee networks on governance, conflict and
fragility.

[ a govspace site ]
