Joint Declaration on Open Government
for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development
As participants in the Open Government Partnership, commit-
ted to the principles enshrined in the Open Government Dec-
laration, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the United
Nations Convention Against Corruption and other relevant in-
ternational instruments related to effective and inclusive insti-
tutions and human rights, we:
Recognize the importance of harnessing our efforts and cham-
pioning the principles of transparency and open government
as crucial tools for ensuring the effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Acknowledge this is an ambitious global plan of action for achiev-
ing inclusive sustainable development in its economic, political,
social and environmental dimensions, in a balanced and inte-
grated manner to end poverty and combat inequality within and
among countries.
Welcome the inclusion in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development of goals and targets related to transparency,
accountability, integrity and citizen participation. They are es-
sential for promoting the rule of law, reducing corruption, and
promoting public access to information and the development of
effective and accountable institutions.
Applaud the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development for rec-
ognizing that peaceful and inclusive societies are vital compo-
nents of sustainable development.
Value and welcome the participation of civil society organiza-
tions in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
Promote the Open Government Partnership as a platform for
voluntary cooperation and peer exchange and learning. The ex-
perience of its participating governments and civil society orga-
nizations can be drawn on to encourage transparent, account-
able, participatory, and technology-enabled implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Together, we declare our commitment to:
1. Promote the rule of law consistent with international stan-
dards at the national, regional and international level through
transparency, openness, accountability, access to justice and
effective and inclusive institutions. This is consistent with Goal
16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
2. Promote public access to timely and disaggregated informa-
tion and open data on government activities related to the im-
plementation and financing of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in line with national legislation and international
commitments . We support development of the International
Open Data Charter and intend to explore its implementation in
our countries.
3. Support citizen participation in the implementation of all the
goals and targets in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Develop-
ment, including decision-making, policy formulation, follow up
and evaluation processes.
4. Uphold the principles of open government, as described in
the Open Government Declaration, when defining international,
regional and national indicators for measuring the implementa-
tion of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, taking
into account national circumstances and development priori-
ties. We will identify and share lessons learned and good prac-
tices to strengthen country capacity for implementation.
5. Use our Open Government Partnership National Action Plans
to adopt commitments that serve as effective tools to pro-
mote transparent and accountable implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development
September 2015
