NSW Government
Open Data Policy
Vision
Why open data?
Better, faster, more open data
NSW Government agencies:
Better
Faster
More
Release better data in
accessible, consumable
formats with metadata
and quality statements
Release data faster using
automated processes,
standard data categories
and trusted user models
Release more data and
make it discoverable
through central portals
Open data is a tremendous resource.
It provides the intelligence for insight,
invention and exploration that translate
into better products and services that
improve everyday life and encourage
business growth.
Research shows that open data has a significant
impact in four key areas:
•	 improving government
•	 empowering citizens
•	 creating opportunity
•	 solving problems.
The NSW Open Data Policy has contributed to improved
outcomes for vulnerable populations protecting the
environment, good government, and road safety.
The review of the policy in 2016 renews the NSW
Government commitment to open data to support;
transparency, innovation, and new knowledge and
insights from combined data sources.
NSW Government Open Data Policy
1NSW Government
Open Data Policy
NSW Data Analytics Centre (DAC)
The DAC facilitates data sharing between agencies
and manages whole-of-government analytics projects.
It does that by leveraging internal and external
partnerships so that the right capabilities, tools and
technologies are applied.
Introduction
The Open Data environment
This policy is part of the data environment
underpinning Government initiatives
which are leading to business growth
and to improvements in everyday life.
Open Government, Smart Cities, the Data
Analytics Centre and the NSW Open Data
Advocate are some of these initiatives.
Open Government
A smart government is transparent and accountable,
and understands that solutions to policy challenges
can come from outside government. It collaborates
with community and industry partners, encourages
participation in the policy formulation and decision
making process, and encourages innovation from
employees and external stakeholders.
Public service agencies are now more open and
collaborative as a result of the reforms commenced
under the Strategy. By 2014, the amount of information
the NSW Government published online had more
than doubled, more agencies conducted customer
satisfaction surveys than in previous years, and most
NSW Government agencies now had social media
policies in place to better engage with customers.
This shows a deeper involvement with the community
and a commitment to ensuring that there are multiple
contact points within government for customers.
Smart Cities
Smart cities are generally considered in terms of using
technology to connect infrastructure such as transport,
health, energy and water, generating data that can be
used for better services and better planning. Open
data makes this information available to everyone, from
families to retailers, commuters to investors. Open data
allows everyone to understand and interact with our
cities, to contribute to their growth and development.
The DAC works with data from a variety of sources,
including open data, to derive insights that support
strategic decision making, evidence based policy
development and improved service delivery.
The DAC advises agencies on how data can be
opened to the public in line with the Open Data Policy,
including de-identification.
NSW Open Data Advocate
The Information Commissioner promotes public
awareness and understanding of the object of the
GIPA Act: to open government information to the
public including authorising and encouraging the
proactive public release of information by agencies.
The Information Commissioner has taken on the role
of NSW Open Data Advocate. The Open Data Advocate
will play a key role in ensuring that the new Open Data
Policy is successfully implemented. Activating the role
of Open Data Advocate will provide assistance to
citizens making a request to access information, and
provide advice to agencies to streamline processes
for data release.
The Information Commissioner may investigate and
report on the exercise by agencies of their functions
under and compliance with the GIPA Act, and can
investigate complaints made about an agency’s conduct
in carrying out its functions under the GIPA Act. This
independent regulatory oversight role promotes
accountability and public confidence in the release and
management of data by government sector agencies.
The Information Commissioner oversees the
transparency obligations of agencies in the GIPA Act
including that:
•	agencies must make information publicly available
as open access information under Part 3 Division 1
of the GIPA Act
•	disclosure logs where agencies must record
information that has been requested formally and
which the agency decides may be of interest to
other members of the public (Part 3 Division 4).
The obligations of agencies are outlined in Part 3
Division 2 Agency Information Guides.
NSW Government Open Data Policy
2NSW Government
Open Data Policy
Progress to date
In 2009, the Government Information Public Access Act
(GIPAA) established NSW Government’s commitment
to opening government information, proactively and
responsively, to the public. Data NSW was launched as
the first State level open data catalogue in the world.
In 2013, the Open Data Policy was introduced to
support simple and efficient compliance with GIPAA
and encourage the release of high value datasets for
use by industry and the community. The Policy aimed to
assist agencies in embedding open data principles in
their operations.
Data NSW now receives between 3,000 and
5,000 visits every month. The site contains
approximately 350 catalogue entries which provide
access to over 50,000 government datasets, which are
published on agency portals. This approach allows open
data to be searched in a central location, but also made
available alongside data on the same subject – such as
education,
health or environment. Data NSW has also been
federated with open data portals from other
jurisdictions so that a search will provide links to
datasets from South Australia, Queensland and the
Commonwealth Government.
NSW Government has adopted an open access licensing
framework to support the release and reuse of public
information. We have also adopted the Australian
Bureau of Statistics framework for standard data
quality reporting.
The 2016 policy drives the release of more data, in better
open formats, using automated processes for faster
publication. The newly established Open Data Rolling
Release Schedule indicates agency targets to improve
the openness of their published data and to release new,
high value datasets.
Land and Property Information is now providing
spatial data, such as the NSW Cadastre, imagery and
administrative boundaries, as web services. The NSW
Address Location Service web service allows the user
to enter an address and pinpoint the location of that
address. The web services allow users to access the
most up to date information without having to store and
maintain it in their own systems or applications.
The web services can be used in multiple ways e.g.
direct use, mashups, mobile apps and spatial systems.
The NSW Education Datahub is a searchable central
repository of publically available data with a range of
video tutorials on using it. Department of Education
is also a partner in the Code for Australia fellowship
program. The Fellowship Program pairs civic-minded
technologists, designers and community organisers with
a government agency for a 12-month collaboration.
For example, to develop a service that uses education
and location data to make it easier for parents and
carers to select a school for their children.
Information Management Framework
The NSW Government Information Management
Framework (the IM Framework) establishes a common
approach to managing government data
and information.
The IM Framework is made up of policies, standards
and guidance for managing data and information
consistently across the sector. It enables agencies
to appropriately protect, share and publish data and
information in ways that support better services, and
to derive the best value from investments in data,
information and technology.
This policy forms part of the IM Framework.
Case studies
Progress is demonstrated by the following three
case studies.
Transport for NSW established the NSW transport data
exchange (TDX) program. Data is available in a range
of machine-readable, spatially enabled formats.
TDX provides real time data on:
•	 timetables, routes and stops
•	  here your train, bus, ferry or light rail service
w
is right now and estimated arrival times
•	 live traffic updates and incidents
•	 travel times
•	 scheduled road work.
NSW Government Open Data Policy
3NSW Government
Open Data Policy
Objectives Scope
The objectives of this policy are to assist NSW
Government agencies to: This policy applies to all NSW Government agencies
including cluster agencies, Departments, Statutory
Bodies and Shared Service Providers. In accordance
with Premier’s Memorandum M1999-19 Applicability of
Memoranda and Circulars to State Owned Corporations,
the Policy is not mandatory for State Owned
Corporations, although it is recommended for adoption.
NSW Government funded research data must also be
made open under this policy.
•	 r  elease data for use by the community, research,
business and industry
•	  ccelerate the use of data to derive new insights for
a
better public services
•	 embed open data into business-as-usual
•	  se data to inform the design of policy, programs
u
and procurement
•	 s  upport the use of data by the NSW Data Analytics
Centre for research and evidence-based
decision making
•	  dvance citizen engagement with government and
a
the work of government
•	 support the Government Information (Public Access)
Act 2009 (NSW) (GIPA Act) and promote simple
and efficient compliance with the requirements set
out in that Act.
What is open data?
This policy focuses on datasets as an aspect of
information defined in the Government Information
(Public Access) Act 2009 (NSW) (GIPA Act).
A dataset is an identifiable collection of government
held information or data. Most commonly a dataset
corresponds to the contents of a single database table,
or a single statistical data matrix. The term can also be
used to refer to the data in a collection of closely related
tables. A dataset may comprise a smaller grouping
(or subset) of data which, though limited by some
constraint or feature type, is located physically within a
larger dataset.
Target audiences for this policy include government
agencies, non-government organisations (NGOs),
academia, industry (including ICT developers) and
members of the public who are interested in or have a
specific use for government data.
Open Data Principles
Open data principles lead to more responsive and
smarter government, and better service delivery.
To meet the obligations of this policy, agencies must
manage data as a strategic asset to be:
•	 Open by default, protected where required
•	 Prioritised, discoverable and usable
•	 Primary and timely
•	 Well managed, trusted and authoritative
•	 Free where appropriate
•	 Subject to public input.
Data is open to the extent that its management, release
and characteristics meet the principles of openness
outlined in this policy. Open data should be both
technically available and usable, and have licensing
frameworks in place to facilitate its release and use.
NSW Government Open Data Policy
4NSW Government
Open Data Policy
Agency
responsibilities
Open by default
and protected
where required
 gencies will start from a position of data openness,
A
favouring the release of data, unless there is
an overriding public interest against disclosure
(Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
(NSW) (GIPA Act).
A Rolling Release Schedule for agencies’ plans to
publish open data is available on Data NSW. The Rolling
Release Schedule targets improved formats for data and
identifies new high value datasets for release.
Agencies must:
•	  reate and collect data in ways that support
C
downstream processing and release
•	 I  ncorporate open data into project, program, service,
system and policy design
•	  ake data available without reference to its potential
M
end use by other parties
•	  nsure they own all intellectual property rights in the
E
dataset, or that they have a sufficiently broad licence
to permit its release
•	  omply with NSW Government policies for
C
information security (e.g. NSW Government Digital
Information Security Policy) and other relevant
NSW Government information security and
privacy policies, state and federal legislations and
guidelines) and the management of privacy for the
individual
Prioritised,
discoverable
and usable
High-value datasets will be prioritised for release, in line
with demand from the public and industry, as a result
of stakeholder consultation, or where the release of the
datasets will contribute to better service delivery
in NSW.
Data will be in a format that makes it easy to use,
transform and reuse. Commonly accepted open data
standards, are published by the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C) to enhance data usability.
When procuring or upgrading systems according to
the ICT Investment Policy and Guidelines, agencies will
consider the use of technologies that enable data to
be consumed by other systems, without the need for
manual intervention.
Metadata allows datasets to be found, understood,
controlled and managed. It will be published with all
datasets. It will define or describe content, quality,
format or structure of a dataset, the system, location
and context in which the dataset was produced,
collected, processed or stored.
Agencies must:
•	  elease data which supports a range of outcomes,
R
including; social, enhanced service delivery, agency
core business, economic opportunity, generates
efficiencies or reduced costs, supports evidence
based research or policy
•	  rioritise the release of datasets in response to
P
public requests
•	  ink datasets to Data NSW for discoverability
L
and availability
•	  nsure datasets are technically open
E
(machine readable)
 pply information labels and security classifications
A
which indicate whether data is protected, in line with
the NSW Government Information Classification,
Labelling and Handling Guidelines •	  pply creative commons licensing (default CC-BY)
A
to facilitate the reuse of data, making it legally open
•	  pply the correct data standards to manage their
A
data. See the Information Management Framework
•	  nsure safeguards are in place to manage and assess
E
the release of sensitive datasets •	 •	  pply managed methods to support the release of
A
otherwise sensitive data such as: redacting, consent,
ethics approval, aggregating and third party
brokerage (mediator or integrator).  ublish metadata with all datasets and the details
P
of a contact person in their agency. Data NSW can
assist with this and may be contacted through the
contact form on the site
•	  ssess the quality of their datasets prior to release
A
with the Data Quality Standard. The standard
can be used to report whether datasets meet the
above requirements.
•	
NSW Government Open Data Policy
5NSW Government
Open Data Policy
Primary
and timely
Free where
appropriate
Data will be released as collected at the source, with
a high level of granularity, and not in aggregate or
modified forms unless required to safeguard confidential
or personal data. Reuse will acknowledge the source and
include the metadata. Access to open data will be free by default.
The widespread use of data for innovation will be
encouraged to achieve the maximum value from
the data for the people of NSW, and to enhance
transparency of government.
Agencies must: Agencies must:
•	 I  mplement mechanisms that enable automated,
ongoing or periodic regular release of data, without
the need for manual intervention •	 Provide data free of charge
•	  stablish standard parameters for cost recovery
E
(only for specialised data services).
•	  ublish live, real-time feeds where it enhances the
P
utility of the dataset •	 Publish any fees for data use.
•	 I  nclude timestamps or other information for users to
identify the currency of the data •	  ake newer, replacement data available to users
M
in a timely manner.
Well managed,
trusted and
authoritative
Users will be alerted to the quality and limitations
of the data to ensure confidence that it is trustworthy
and authoritative.
Data governance arrangements will be established and
maintained in accordance with NSW Government’s
information management principles and the Data and
Information Custodianship Policy.
Agencies must:
•	
•	
 anage data in accordance with legislative and
M
legal requirements, including those for data security
and protection of personal information, intellectual
property, business confidentiality and legal
professional privilege
Apply sound archival practices to preserve data.
Subject to
public input
Agencies will engage with and are informed by the
community, research sector and industry on the design
of new datasets and data portals, and in deciding what
data to publish and about publication practices.
Agencies must:
•	  rovide data in a way that is relevant to the
P
transaction being undertaken or service
being used
•	  articipate with activities across jurisdictions to
P
share and integrate data at the national level.
•	  ublish community and industry feedback
P
about the data.
Implementation
This Policy is supported by an action plan to assist
agencies in achieving open data objectives.
This Policy is maintained by the Department of Finance,
Services and Innovation.
© State of New South Wales (Department of Finance, Services and Innovation) 2016. For current information go to
www.lsb.justice.nsw.gov.au/lsb/nswcopyright.html. This work (apart from any State arms, symbols or trademarks) is licensed
under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 licence. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ for details.
NSW Government Open Data Policy
6
