Australia’s National Action Plan for the Open Government Partnership
Interim Working Group
Draft Terms of Reference
Purpose
1. The purpose of the Interim Working Group is for government and civil society to co-draft Australia’s National Action Plan for the Open Government Partnership. 
Role
2. The Interim Working Group will:
a. consider the ‘grand challenges’ and ‘themes’ to be addressed by the National Action Plan;
b. consider proposed commitments identified as part of earlier consultation processes, and prioritise up to 15 commitments for possible inclusion in the plan, having regard to:
i. consistency and level of priority against the OGP principles;
ii. the likelihood of implementation success;
iii. the costs and benefits of the proposed commitments (including alternatives to achieve a similar outcome); and
iv. the views of the relevant Australian Government agency.
c. facilitate broader consultation and comment on the proposed commitments;
d. provide input on the draft text of the National Action Plan; and
e. consider submitting a letter of commendation to the Open Government Partnership to accompany the National Action Plan.
Term
3. The Interim Working Group is effective from 25 August 2016 and continues until the National Action Plan is finalised and submitted to the Open Government Partnership. 
Membership
4. The Interim Working Group will comprise equal representation of government officials and a range of civil society stakeholders.
5. Civil society is represented by:
a. Ms Fiona McLeod SC (co-chair): President-elect of the Law Council of Australia;

b. The Hon Dr Ken Coghill: Deputy Chair and Treasurer of the Accountability Round Table; Associate Professor at Monash University; 

c. Ms Maree Adshead: CEO of ODI Queensland; 

d. Mr Peter Timmins: Interim Convenor of the Australian OGP Civil Society Network; 

e. Mr Mark Zirnsak: Director of Justice and International Mission, Synod of Victoria and Tasmania, Uniting Church in Australia; and 

f. Ms Katherine Szuminska: Co-founder and Director of the OpenAustralia Foundation.

6. The Australian Government is represented by:

a. Dr Steven Kennedy (co-chair): Deputy Secretary, Innovation & Transformation, 
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet;

b. Dr Stein Helgeby: Deputy Secretary, Governance & APS Transformation, Department of Finance; 

c. Mr Iain Anderson: Deputy Secretary, Civil Justice and Corporate Group, Attorney General’s Department;  

d. Ms Meghan Quinn: First Assistant Secretary, Financial System Division, Treasury;

e. Mr Timothy Pilgrim: Australian Privacy Commissioner and Acting Australian Information Commissioner; and

f. Ms Anne Lyons: Assistant Director-General, Government Information Assurance & Policy, National Archives of Australia.

7. The NSW Information Commissioner, Ms Elizabeth Tydd will also participate as a non-voting jurisdictional member.
Decision-making 
8. Decisions by the Interim Working Group will be made after at least 75 per cent of members reach consensus. All members will be given equal opportunity to make decisions.
9. Final decisions on the content of Australia’s National Action Plan will rest with the Australian Government. 
10. Any areas of disagreement will be documented and may be reported to Government at the request of the Interim Working Group. 

Frequency of meetings
11. A minimum of four meetings of the Interim Working Group are expected to be held.
12. The majority of the Interim Working Group’s work is expected to be conducted via email, teleconference and/or videoconference, as well as one face-to-face workshop.
Secretariat and other support
13. Secretariat support will be provided by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, including:
a. preparing draft agendas and supporting papers;
b. organising logistics for meetings;
c. preparing meeting minutes; and
d. publishing the agenda and minutes from meetings on the Open Government Partnership – Australia blog (http://ogpau.govspace.gov.au).
14. Members will not be remunerated. If required, any travel costs and associated expenses for non‑government members for the face-to-face workshop will be met jointly by the Australian Government and civil society. 
Amendment or Variation
15. This Terms of Reference may be amended, varied or modified in writing after consultation and agreement by Interim Working Group members.

