****** 4.2 – National Integrity Framework ******
We will collaborate with the corporate sector, non-government organisations and
the public to strengthen our national anti-corruption and integrity framework.
Objective
Australia will strengthen our ability to prevent, detect and respond to bribery
and corruption. As part of this, we will regularly review the jurisdiction and
capabilities of the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity (ACLEI)
and the Australian Federal Police’s Fraud and Anti-Corruption Centre to ensure
they can focus on protecting Commonwealth agencies from risks of corruption.
Status Quo
The Government takes a multi-faceted, multi-agency approach to combating
corruption, under which a range of agencies play a role in preventing,
detecting and responding to corruption. We have strong laws applying to bribery
and corruption which carry significant penalties.
ACLEI is responsible for preventing, detecting and investigating serious issues
of corruption in agencies within its jurisdiction. ACLEI’s jurisdiction
focusses on protecting environments that are most at risk of criminal
compromise—namely, border regulation and law enforcement.
The Integrity Commissioner considers the nature and scope of corruption
revealed by investigations, and reports annually on any patterns and trends in
corruption in Australian Government law enforcement and other government
agencies which have law enforcement functions. Accordingly, ACLEI collects
intelligence about corruption in support of the Integrity Commissioner’s
functions.
ACLEI also aims to understand corruption and prevent it. Where the Integrity
Commissioner identifies laws of the Commonwealth or administrative practices of
government agencies that might contribute to corrupt practices or prevent their
early detection, he or she may make recommendations for these laws or practices
to be changed.
As a practitioner agency, ACLEI engages actively with other government agencies
and civil society (nationally and internationally) to collect and share
information to strengthen anti-corruption arrangements in Australia and abroad.
ACLEI’s dissemination program of Information Reports is one means by which the
Integrity Commissioner transmits timely intelligence to relevant agencies, such
as to police and other integrity agencies. ACLEI and the AFP Fraud and Anti-
Corruption Centre (FACC) also cross-refer information to one another, and
assist one another with corruption prevention activities.
In 2014, the Government established the FACC located in the AFP headquarters to
bring together a range of Commonwealth agencies to assess, prioritise and
respond to serious fraud and corruption matters, including across Commonwealth
services, programs and employees. The FACC draws on the collective knowledge of
agencies to provide sound contemporary advice in relation to potential fraud
threats relevant to new government funding initiatives prior to their
implementation. In April 2016, the Government provided an additional $15
million to the FACC to enhance its capacity to detect and investigate
corruption, bribery and serious economic crime.
Between the FACC and ACLEI, there is significant coverage of fraud and
corruption across Australian Government agencies, with a particular focus on
areas of high-corruption risk.
The Government has reviewed ACLEI’s jurisdiction on a number of occasions in
the past and extended its jurisdiction where a need was demonstrated.
In May 2016, the Joint Committee on the Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement Integrity reported on its inquiry into ACLEI’s jurisdiction. Many
public submissions have advocated extension of its coverage to the entire
public sector. The Committee recommended the Government extend ACLEI’s
jurisdiction to include the entire Department of Agriculture and Water
Resources, and examine the feasibility of including the Australian Taxation
Office within ACLEI’s jurisdiction. The Government is considering the report’s
recommendations.
The Government is also exploring new responses to corruption and corporate
crime. In March 2016, the Government released a public discussion paper on a
possible deferred prosecution agreement scheme in Australia. An effective
deferred prosecution agreement scheme could help encourage companies to self-
report criminal behaviour and provide enforcement and prosecutorial agencies
with a new tool to identify and bring corporate offenders to justice.
Ambition
To aim to improve Australia’s score on Transparency International Corruption
Perception Index.
To regularly review the jurisdiction and capabilities of ACLEI and FACC, and
extend these on an as-needs basis.
To consult closely with industry, non-government organisations and the public
to ensure that our law, policies and frameworks for responding to corruption
are effective, including through holding the first government business
roundtable on corruption in 2017. We will also consult publicly on the
implementation of recommendations from the Statutory Review of the Anti-Money
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006 and associated Rules and
Regulations.
To ensure that our laws applying to the bribery of foreign public officials
facilitate effective prosecution.
To assess whether a deferred prosecution agreement scheme would facilitate more
effective and efficient responses to bribery and corporate corruption by
encouraging companies to self-report.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values of access to information and public
accountability by:
    * improving the effectiveness of our legal, regulatory and institutional
      frameworks; and
    * protecting the integrity and transparency of the execution of public
      policy and management.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * Increasing Public Integrity
Timeframes
End 2016 – 2019
Lead agency
Attorney-General’s Department
Other actors involved
Government: ACLEI, Australian Federal Police, Australian Securities and
Investments Commission, Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions, Treasury
and Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Non-government: Industry, organisations outside of government and international
partners
Milestones
   1. Review laws applying to foreign bribery.
          o End – Early 2017
   2. Respond to the recommendations of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
      ACLEI’s inquiry into the jurisdiction of ACLEI.
          o May 2016 – End 2016 / Early 2017
   3. Respond to the consultation on a possible Australian deferred prosecution
      agreement scheme and consult on possible models.
          o End 2016 – Mid 2017
   4. Consult publicly on the implementation of recommendations from the
      Statutory Review of the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism
      Financing Act 2006 and associated Rules and Regulations.
          o October 2016 – 2019
   5. Hold the first Government business roundtable on corruption.
          o First half of 2017
   6. Consider options arising from the roundtable.
          o Mid 2017
   7. Ongoing review of jurisdiction and capabilities of ACLEI and FACC.
          o Ongoing

[ a govspace site ]
