****** 5.1 – Delivery of Australia’s Open Government National Action Plan
******
We will ensure that Australia’s Open Government National Action Plan is a
platform for ongoing dialogue, collaboration and open government reform.
Objective
Australia will establish a permanent dialogue mechanism with civil society,
which includes a multi stakeholder forum. The multi-stakeholder forum will
track the implementation of commitments, ensure commitments continue to be
relevant and ambitious, inform the drafting of future National Action Plans and
raise awareness about open government in the broader community.
Status Quo
OGP countries are required to establish a multi-stakeholder forum to consult
with the public and organisations outside of government on the implementation
of the commitments included in their National Action Plan. Detailed guidance on
establishing a multi-stakeholder forum is outlined in the OGP’s handbook.
OGP countries have taken different approaches to establishing their multi-
stakeholder forum. Some models adopted in other countries include:
    * Civil society network: Coalition of non-government organisations and
      individuals.
    * Single forum: Convenes government, the public and organisations outside
      of government in one formally established, central committee for co-
      ordination.
    * Hub-and-spoke: Network of smaller forums (broken down by sector, thematic
      area or commitments etc.), which may be coordinated by a central
      committee.
The Government will work in partnership with civil society to determine the
structure, role, governance and membership of the OGP multi stakeholder forum.
This may include setting up or continuing interim structures until a permanent
forum can be established.
It is also important that Australia’s commitments remain relevant and ambitious
throughout the National Action Plan cycle. This will be achieved through
ongoing review of milestones, with updates made (as necessary) in partnership
with civil society. The Government will also work with the public to identify
any additional commitments that could be included in the National Action Plan
over the two year cycle.
Ambition
To identify, develop and implement ambitious open government commitments
through ongoing partnership with civil society.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values of public participation and
accountability by:
    * ensuring commitments remain relevant and ambitious throughout the
      National Action Plan cycle;
    * keeping government accountable for the implementation of National Action
      Plan commitments;
    * raising awareness about the Open Government Partnership and open
      government matters in Australia and the region; and
    * ensuring participation by a broad and diverse range of organisations and
      the public in the development of National Action Plan commitments.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * All Grand Challenges addressed
Timeframes
December 2016 – July 2018
Lead agency
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Other actors involved
Government: All Commonwealth entities
Non-government: Australian Open Government Civil Society Network, other non-
government organisations, private sector and the public
Milestones
   1. Partner with the public and organisations outside of government to
      determine the structure, role, governance and membership of the OGP
      multi-stakeholder forum.
          o December 2016 – Early 2017
   2. Establish a permanent multi-stakeholder forum, with (at a minimum) the
      following responsibilities: develop and co-create future National Action
      Plans; track and report on implementation of National Action Plan
      commitments; facilitate broader community engagement and conduct
      awareness activities that foster informed participation; and document
      decisions and publish reports.
          o Early 2017 – July 2018
   3. Review the National Action Plan and update milestones and commitments (as
      necessary) to provide further clarity and ambition for plan.
          o November 2016 – July 2018

[ a govspace site ]
