Developing Australia’s first Action
Plan for Open Government
In November 2015, the Australian Government publically committed to the Open
Government Partnership (OGP) - an international agreement to make governments
more open, accountable and responsive.
‘Open Government’ typically refers to the use of open data, public participation, technology and innovation, and ways to
collaborate with stakeholders to achieve greater transparency, accountability and more effective governance.
Each country that commits to the OGP is required to develop a National Action Plan to outline how they will deliver an
Open Government. The Action Plan will reflect the principles of Open Government and detail specific, measureable
ways the Government will achieve them; progress will be evaluated every two years by the OGP.
The National Action Plan must be completed by June 2016 to meet the OGP timetable and is expected to comply with
the OGP requirements. Details about the OGP are available on the OGP website www.opengovpartnership.org.
The Australian Government has chosen two OGP ‘Grand Challenges’ as focus areas for the National
Action Plan:
• Improving Public Services – measures that address the full spectrum of citizen services including health, education,
criminal justice, water, electricity, telecommunications, and any other relevant service areas by fostering public
service improvement or private sector innovation; and
• More Effectively Managing Public Resources – measures that address budgets, procurement, natural resources,
and foreign assistance.
The process for developing the National Action Plan is open. The Australian Government is inviting individuals and
organisations across Australia to suggest actions to include in the Plan and engage2 are working with the Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet to encourage input. We are looking for your ideas about how the Government can
deliver Open Government to help meet the OGP Grand Challenges.
How you can participate
• Keep up to date and comment on our progress via the website: ogpau.govspace.gov.au
• Suggest an action for the National Action Plan or Comment on drafting of the National Action
at the wiki ogpau.wikispaces.com
• Make a formal submission via email ogp@pmc.gov.au
• Host an event in March – email: amelia@engage2.com.au
In April 2016, 5-15 actions will be selected will be to be workshop into commitments for the National Action Plan.
The timeline for plan development is on the back of this page.
Amelia Loye Engagement Specialist | +61 411960585 | amelia@engage2.com.au | engage2.com.au | @Emotivate6
