Australia's first National Action Plan for the Open Government Partnership
August 2016
No.
Summary of stakeholder suggestions
THEME: Open data
Hansard, legislation and policy discussions should be available in the JSON format / XML feeds.
Create a data register by agency on what data they hold, what state it is in, and what access is permitted.
Identify and release high value data. Create opportunities and mechanisms for the public to contribute to this list.
Establish a single place to discover all consultations, publications, policies.
Strengthen Australia's data infrastructure.
Establish an open publications repository for government documents to improve the discovery and accessibility of government
publications, data, research reports and other resources. Set targets and measure results for open publishing and use of creative
commons licenses.
Data standards: international benchmarks, metadata, formats, cross-jurisdictional support etc.
Assist local councils to open their data and support data standardisation.
Share best practice across government and government funded organisations.
Mashable Gov: Government data is made available in machine readable form via standards based Application Programmer
Interfaces (APIs). Create a standard workflow for releasing, updating, and using open data by processing all datasets in the same
manner through an automated and repeatable process.
Open data challenge series to solve social/economic/environmental problems (based on the Open Data Institute UK's initiative).
Baseline the maturity of the open data publishing practice of all Australian Government Departments and Agencies using a free
online tool such as the Open Data Institute's Open Data Pathway.
Establish a Data Futures Partnership, a cross-sector group of influential people working together to drive high-trust and high-value
data use (based on NZ model).
Improve open data for Regional Australia.
Develop portal similar to the EU Open Data Monitor.

Establish teams responsible for 'declassification', or opening, of government archives that were closed under past decisions.
Amend FOI legislation to enable requests for data.
Open data on the number of internal versus external hires for the APS to ensure diverse recruitment within Government.
Cross-jurisdictions structures should be established and managed by Federal Government. Use the Cross Jurisdictional Open Data
Government Working Group to create a structure or process (separate to their private meetings) whereby the public can engage
with jurisdictions.
Data should be published in a form that can be scrapped by open-data bots and consolidated for public viewing.
Allow individuals to access their own personal data.
Fund PSMA Australia Ltd and publish its data openly.
Implement the Open Data Monitor in Australia to help in the discovery and assessment of open data quality.
Adopt Open Data Certificates to demonstrate publisher best practice.
Establish an open data/open government Cooperative Research Centre to provide the infrastructure and research commitment
required to make use of open data in the Australian context for policy, business and research purposes.
Streamline government IT purchasing practices to understand, then capitalise upon the opportunities of open technologies: open
source, open data, open standards, open architectures.
Ensure data is available under an appropriately open licence.
Identify a process for Government agencies to share what data sources they are working on so as to avoid duplication but also to
share costs in developing data.
Improve access to data on natural resources, mining and resource exploration and production projects.
Release following datasets to facilitate effective decision-making and deliver better outcomes for the public:
- health and community data, including mental health;
- natural resources;
- energy sales;
- energy efficiency of housing stocks; and
- national security/policing/criminal justice.
Make customs data publicly available to enable a greater ability to detect where Australian importers are dealing with suppliers
where there is the presence of criminal activity, human rights abuses and/or unlawful environmental destruction.

THEME: Fostering innovation
Procurement that enables innovation: Agencies contemplating tenders should be required to give adequate notice of their
intentions and take submissions regarding innovative possibilities.
Public and private participation to source innovative solutions to problems and drive cultural change. Enable local solutions to be
scaled and diverse stakeholders to participate.
Establish an open and transparent process to encourage unsolicited proposals from the public, business and industry. Could be
achieved through crowd-souring, public consideration / voting or internal taskforce.
Cross-sector collaboration to enable co-designing and co-creation of innovative solutions. Undertake pilots and experiments to
test innovative ideas.
Require that .5% of superannuation is put into Venture Capital (Innovation) Projects.
1Australia's first National Action Plan for the Open Government Partnership
August 2016
Intellectual Property review:
- Conduct a review of existing IP rules
- Gather information from each agency on their IP policy and framework
- Conduct a national forum to discuss and agree on contemporary standards and create educational tools
- Create a central place for each agency to publish their IP policy and frameworks
- Create a place where details of open source technologies used and project case studies can be easily accessible and shared
internally and externally.
Involve students in the innovation process to gain their perspectives as digital natives, future users and employees of government
agencies.
Share code across Government agencies: Agencies could publish their internally developed code (production versions) to a central
repository that could be indexed and searched by other agencies. Potential to eventually make open to the public.
Cultural change towards failure and innovation through consensus and hiring private sector employees (who are less risk adverse)
within the APS.
Reward and promote solutions in local communities and public service delivery through payment models that pay 5-10% of
savings.
Require 1% of Superannuation goes into Social Impact Bonds with Government guarantees.
Pilot program to capture and measure government innovation activity (activity/output, outcome and impact indicators).
THEME: Public service delivery
Establish and support events for industry, community and government to solve civic and public service issues.
Build capabilities through training and development of:
- front line/customer service staff to facilitate efficient delivery of services; and
- DIBP staff to apply correct decision-making rules.
Establish a mentoring program to build and retain corporate knowledge within an organisation.
Improve transparent decision making / case management for immigration and citizenship cases.
Develop government portal for identity management.
Develop a single, open platform to enable collaboration across providers and improve efficiencies in natural resource
management and healthcare.
Mandatory APIs for citizens and businesses to enable data linkage.
Customer-designed platform focused on increasing information accessibility about available government services to enable people
to more effectively navigate and participate in programs and access services.
Create, manage and preserve information digitially to support transparency, accountability and citizen engagement.

THEME: Government integrity
Adoption of the recommendations from the Independent Parliamentary Entitlements System Report.
Institute a policy of open access to politicians’ diaries and travel arrangements which could be published online in close to real
time (i.e. the day after) as possible.
Development of an efficient feedback system to report lapses, incorrect advice/actions and inappropriate conduct by government
officers is imperative as a corrective mechanism.
Development and adoption of a Parliamentary Integrity System, including a code of conduct for each of the House of
Representatives and the Senate, in line with international better practice. E.g. Recommended Benchmarks for Legislatures,
adopted in 2006 by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the UNDP and the World Bank.
Institutionalise a regular legislative openness review.
- Parliamentary openness commitments in future OGP action plans.
- Conduct a parliamentary information audit.
- Formally task a committee or other body within Parliament to monitor parliamentary openness and citizen engagement efforts.
- Engage in international fora dedicated to sharing international good practice.
Open access to legal advice obtained by Government that is used as the basis of policy decisions.
Increase protection for whistleblowers: Deliver legislation to protect private sector whistleblowers exposing fraud, corruption, tax
evasion and tax avoidance in the privatesector, to match legislation to protect whistleblowers in the public sector.
Estbalish an anti-corruption agency: Form a working group that would consult with the public, community groups and legal,
government and business organisations on the establishment of an Independent Federal Corruption Commission with proper
powers to take and act on complaints of corruption within government.
Extend the register of lobbyists to ensure the published list of owners is full and complete naming all the beneficiaries and financial
relationships etc.
End the scoping study for the sale of the ASIC Register and make the data free and easy to access.
Institute a ban on former politicians, especially Ministers, taking up positions in lobbying organisations, corporations or in
associations involved in lobbying activities on behalf of members.
Design a plan to reform political donations. Suggested options:
- ban donations altogether;
- implement a close to real-time disclosure of political donations published on the Australian Electoral Commission website; or
- pass legislation that establishes a single independent entity that administers all political donations.
2Australia's first National Action Plan for the Open Government Partnership
August 2016
Endorse the Declaration on Parliamentary Openness.
All Commonwealth, state and territory parliamentary and local council proceedings should be made available via live web
streaming with accessible closed captions, using open standards rather than requiring proprietary plugins and under creative
commons. Hansard transcripts should be accessible via API, searchable by speaker (including committee witnesses), and published
in well-formed HTML (not just PDF).
Australian Government to develop a plan following the UK Summit that forms a part of the OGP National Action Plan on the topic
of anti-corruption.
The Government develop a Parliamentary Integrity System, including:
- a code of conduct for each of the House of Representatives and the Senate, consistent with the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association’s Benchmarks;
- appointment of a Parliamentary Integrity Commissioner; and
- an independent system to review claims of public interest immunity by the Executive in response to requests by Parliament for
the production of documents .
Establish a national online register of Community Plans on a regional basis across Australia.
Formal requirement for government staff, five years from retirement, to mentor younger employees for 12 months.
Annual report on the way in which each member represents their electorate, measured against their own commitments
documented in a publicly available "Statement of Approach” released prior to each election.
Establish a regular Community Estimates session.
Comply with international commitments for parliamentary conduct.

THEME: Public participation
Establish a public engagement and collaborative approach to the development, implementation and monitoring of major public
policies. Diverse and broad citizens' panel to interpret and evaluate new policies and programs.
Establish an education program to support and upskill citizens to better engage with government.
Implement a whole-of-government challenge platform to enable the public to solve government problems.
Develop a capability for citizens to introduce legislation into parliament for debate and a vote.
Commit to a six or eight week public exposure period for all laws before they are voted on by parliament, with a capability for
individuals and groups to propose amendments and identify issues with potential laws before they are put into practice.
Whole of government guidance and consultation capabilities that focuses on evidence-based policy development.
People's Food Policy Process for Australia: Public engagement to develop a coherent, long-term, fair and sustainable food policy
for Australia.
Establish a peak public interest/ advsory organisation, which:
- monitors government activities;
- maintains a data base of public organisations and individuals with interests in particular issues;
- assesses which government activities appear to require public participation; and
- assists organization and individuals in preparing material and participating, particularly those with limited resources.
Government engagement: Digital, social media, improve data sharing, diverse platforms for engagement, focus on local
communities and kept in an accessible permanent archive. Central register of all government public consultations, including
mechanisms for people and organisations to register for alerts for consultations touching on their areas of interest.
Public participation in the commissioning and classification of statistical publications is needed to make data collection legitimate
and to make the statistics more informative and consensual.
Develop a policy framework which is open, rigorous, collaborative and honest.
Consider the infrastructure to support democratic behaviour, for example:
- legislative mandate for participation;
- safe, accessible physical spaces;
- broader access to technology;
- fact-based media; and
- civic education.
Develop a platform to summarise Agreements made by the Government with global institutions such as the UN, and its application
to Government policies.
Conduct a three-yearly survey of voters in every electorate to assess voter satisfaction and community sentiment on policy issues.
Establish a zero-marginal cost network and platform to crowdsource solutions to problems by working together with industry,
community, academia and government.
Require governments to give reasons for decisions in writing.
Adopt the International Association for Public Participation (IAP2) principles and standards for engagement practice.
Identify public participation champions - key community representatives for local areas to work collaboratively with governments.
Introduce legislation to mandate the use of Citizens' Juries for strategic planning, major policy initiatives or challenges where there
are a divergence of views and potential solutions.
THEME: Fiscal transparency
Forecasting assumptions of the Treasury to be made publicly available.
Aggregate amount paid in legal settlements and ex-gratia payments to non-employees by government agencies.
Establish a publicly available register of the beneficial ownership of companies.
3Australia's first National Action Plan for the Open Government Partnership
August 2016
Procurement: Reform the procurement process making it easier for people and businesses to work with, and collaborate with,
government.
- Improve panel processes to provide mechanism to track projects or related work through the panels.
- Publish selection criteria and the method of award of any contract before the procurement process commences.
- Collect and disclose the identity and beneficial ownership of all bidders.
- Independent monitoring of all stages of the procurement process with a robust, transparent and effective appeals process.
- Information on public procurement should be available in open data format – non-proprietary, searchable, sortable, platform-
independent and machine-readable.
Grants: Adopt 360Giving Data Standard in publishing grant data and build/leverage analysis tools to ensure grants are directed
equitably and strategically.
Participatory budgeting and budget transparency: Greater citizen involvement in budget process, including mechanisms for
agreement by consensus. E.g. Participatory budgeting techniques could be used to decide on projects to be funded under the
"Stronger Communities Programme". Improve open budget data (including mechanisms for lack of standardisation of programme
naming schemes and machinery of government changes) and information regarding how funding flows to the states and local
government.
Expenditure reporting: Publishing of government expenditure records down to $1,000; public register of all gov funded major
projects (all types) along with status, project manager and regular reporting; and machine-readable PBS and Annual Report.
Open Source: Increase government use of open source software through updated guidelines to government purchasing practices.
Open contracting: Adoption of international principles (i.e. the Open Contracting Data Standard). Full details of awarded contracts
should be disclosed and the details of completion of the contract should be published in a timely manner with any alterations to
the terms of the original contract also disclosed.
Application of the Construction Sector Transparency Initiative (CoST) in Australia.
Publish information on official development assistance in line with the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) Standard.
THEME: Ongoing engagement for OGP
Establish an advisory body or stakeholder group comprising government, civil society and the private sector to ensure ongoing
commitment to fulfilling OGP obligations and to guide the ongoing OGP process, implementation, monitoring and reporting.
Consultation with civil society to decide Grand Challenges.
Include Increasing Public Integrity as one of the Grand Challenges.
Prime Minister (or other Ministers) should publish media releases or similar to bring the OGP to the public's attention.
Conduct a a national campaign of engagement. Consultation should include regional Australian, private companies, non-profit
sector, legal and human rights groups, academics and indigenous engagement.
Commonwealth should work with states, territories and local government.
Citizen engagement platform to enable a permanent dialogue with the public and civil society.
Include a vision statement for National Action Plans.
Utilise the IAP2 (International Association for Public Participation) Core Values and Quality Assurance Standards for Community
and Stakeholder Engagement as the benchmark for public participation in the development of the National Action Plan.
List of all stakeholders who have contributed to the consultation be made publicly available to demonstrate the breadth of
stakeholders who have participated.
Establish an OGP team with a mandate to broadly improve both public sector and broader public understanding of open
government and related issues.
Establish a local government (and potentially small-agency) support program to give hands-on assistance in scoping and delivering
meaningful projects.
Implementation of the National Action Plan should be informed by the Productivity Commission's report into data availability and
use.
Education campaign to inform the public about relevant 'entry points' into government departments to initiate opportunities for
public participation.
Citizens’ Jury or similar deliberative mechanism using randomly selected participants to finalise the National Action Plan.
Establish review and report processes for OGP implementation.
THEME: Government data for access to information and transparency
Implement the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative in Australia.
Australia should endorse Joint Declaration on Open Government for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
Create community-focused content explaining mining, resources and energy project processes to improve transparency about
management of natural resources.

THEME: Resource management
Create a single platform for mining and resources project information and extractive industries data, and track the use of the
platform.
4Australia's first National Action Plan for the Open Government Partnership
August 2016
Create a 'Paris Agreement' implementation database and improve data management and standards of the following datasets:
- public policies, agencies and measures relevant to the Paris Agreement;
- greenhouse gas emissions, impact of climate change and other relevant data; and
- research findings and relevant research projects.
Triple bottom-line assessments of the costs and benefits of coal seam gas production.
Ensure the fair and equitable distribution of revenues, royalties and benefits to affected stakeholders.
Create a system for reasonable prioritisation of petroleum title allocation.
Conduct long range environmental impact assessments and mitigation strategies for the development of existing and future CSG
export ports.
Review and change of relevant legislation to ensure socially and environmentally responsible current and future resource
management.
Cease CSG development in populated, prime agricultural, environmentally sensitive land and coastal areas until regulations are
enacted.
Conduct long range environmental impact assessments and mitigation strategies to address tanker and bulk carrier traffic through
the Great Barrier Reef.
THEME: Freedom of Information
Right to know platform for whole of gov with central FOI register and publications, and a central FOI team to work across all
departments consistently for responding to requests.
Review FOI Act:
- as proposed by the 2013 Hawke Review (rec 1).
- Uniform laws across jurisdictions.
- No fees for FOI requests and no exempt agencies.
- Public interest tests to other exemptions such as the exemptions for trade secrets and breach of confidence.
- All information should be considered public and the public servants should have to justify why a generated document should not
be public.
Maintain and fund the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner.
Introduction of a fair use exception to Australian copyright law.
Cabinet papers be released within weeks of Cabinet decisions, excluding those documents relating to security, defence or
international relations.
State and Territory Information Commissioners/Officers/Ombudsmen develop a set of metrics to assess public utilisation of
information access rights in Australia.
