****** 2.1 – Release high-value datasets and enable data driven innovation
******
We will work with the research, not-for-profit and private sectors to release
high-value public datasets and drive social and economic outcomes.
Objective
Australia will continue to make more public data openly available and support
its use to launch commercial and non-profit ventures, conduct research, make
data-driven decisions, and solve complex problems.
Status Quo
Public data is a valuable national resource and its use and reuse can help grow
the economy, improve service delivery and transform policy outcomes.
While significant progress has been made to advance the public data agenda
within Australia, further work needs to be done to harness the full value of
this resource. Ongoing engagement is required to identify the characteristics
of high-value datasets and discover barriers to accessing and sharing data.
The public, research, not-for-profit and private sectors can innovate with this
data in order to generate new business, develop new products and services, and
create social value.
The Government has provided some support to date, including through the Open
Data 500 Australia  and the DataStart initiative.  There is now the opportunity
to build and expand on these pilot initiatives to encourage the use of public
data for social and economic outcomes.
In the Government’s policy for Better and More Accessible Digital Services, the
Government committed to working with research, not-for-profit and private
sectors to identify high-value public datasets for release. This will be
supported by a public registry of significant non sensitive datasets yet to be
published on data.gov.au. The Government is also establishing a $50 million
Smart Cities and Suburbs Program to incentivise local councils to open up their
data and collaborate with communities, local business, not-for-profits and
research institutes to create innovative solutions to urban problems.
The Productivity Commission is undertaking an inquiry into data availability
and use that will also identify the characteristics (and provide examples) of
public datasets that would provide high value to the public, research and
private sectors, as well as the community.
Ambition
To develop an open dialogue between government and non-government sectors to
identify high-value datasets and to stimulate greater use and re‑use of public
data in innovative ways.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values of access to information,
technology and innovation andpublic participation by:
    * identifying and prioritising high-value datasets for priority release;
    * understanding how Australian businesses and not-for-profits are using
      public data;
    * stimulating use and re-use of public data in innovative ways;
    * encouraging the use of public data to create social value;
    * identifying, facilitating and addressing barriers impeding the sharing of
      and access to data; and
    * fostering a dialogue on how public data can be made more useful.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * More Effectively Managing Public Resources
    * Improving Public Services
Timeframes
December 2016 – July 2018
Lead agency
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Other actors involved
Government:Commonwealth Government agencies and state and territory governments
Non-government: Research, not-for-profit and private sectors
Milestones
   1. Review and publicise the outcomes from the pilot DataStart initiative.
          o October – December 2016
   2. Roundtable discussion with the research sector.
          o October 2016
   3. Roundtable discussion with the private sector.
          o November 2016
   4. Roundtable discussion with the not-for-profit sector.
          o February – March 2017
   5. Undertake the second round of the Open Data 500.
          o January – July 2017
   6. Expand the DataStart initiative.
          o July 2017 – July 2018
   7. Broader consultation through surveys, social media and blog posts.
          o October 2016 – March 2017
   8. Develop the High-Value Dataset Framework.
          o March – End 2017
   9. Provide support and mentoring at GovHack events.
          o Ongoing

[ a govspace site ]
