Interim Working Group 
for Australia’s OGP National Action Plan
12:00pm – 2:00pm, Monday 19 September 2016
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
One National Circuit, Barton

MINUTES


Attendance list:
Mr Iain Anderson (co-chair)
Dr Ken Coghill (co-chair)
Dr Stein Helgeby
Ms Meghan Quinn (via telephone)
Ms Anne Lyons
Mr Timothy Pilgrim (via telephone)
Ms Roxane Marcelle-Shaw
Ms Maree Adshead (via telephone)
Mr Peter Timmins
Mr Mark Zirnsak
Ms Katherine Szuminska
Ms Helen Owens
Mr Ryan Black
Ms Kayelle Drinkwater
Apologies: 	Dr Steven Kennedy (represented by Ms Helen Owens)
			Ms Fiona McLeod			
Ms Elizabeth Tydd (represented by Ms Roxane Marcelle-Shaw)
1. Welcome and apologies
2. Update on consultation

Members provided updates from their respective networks, noting that there had been particular stakeholder interest in the proposals around beneficial ownership, information management and access laws, and enhancing the integrity system. 
Members discussed the next steps for further engagement with government departments, Ministers and potential timeframes for public consultation (noting that timeframes were still being settled within government).  
3. Potential commitments for the National Action Plan
Members focused discussion around the draft commitment templates, and agreed on text for the following proposed commitments with no or only minor changes:
Work towards compliance with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. 
Assess Australia’s compliance with the Open Contracting Data Standard.
Explore options for a beneficial ownership register for companies.
Improve whistle-blower protections in the corporate sector.
Digitally transforming the delivery of government services.
Delivery of Australia’s OGP National Action Plan.
Identify and release high-value datasets and enable data-driven innovation.
Build and maintain public trust to address concerns about data sharing.
Members discussed the scope, ambition and details of the following proposed commitments and agreed for lead civil society representatives to work with relevant government members to update the draft commitment templates out-of-session:
Review and modernise information management and access laws (Attorney-General’s Department and Mr Timmins). 
Enhanced integrity system (Attorney-General’s Department and Dr Coghill).
Confidence in electoral/political finance systems and political parties (Department of Finance and Dr Coghill).
Metrics on information access rights (PM&C, National Archives of Australia, Office of the Australian Information Commissioner, and Information and Privacy Commission NSW).
Improve public participation and engagement (PM&C and Ms Szuminska).
Members discussed the possibility of merging the following proposed commitments:
Improve the discoverability and accessibility of government information, with build public data infrastructure; and 
Confidence in electoral/political finance systems, with political party integrity. 
Action: relevant government agencies will work with civil society members to update the draft commitment templates as necessary.  
Mr Timmins led a discussion on Australia’s role in promoting open government in the Asia-Pacific region, including links between the OGP, the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals, and Australia’s international work on anti-bribery measures. Members also discussed the possibility of Australia hosting a regional meeting of the OGP in the future.  
Action: PM&C will consult with Mr Timmins and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, on possible content for the National Action Plan on Australia’s international role.
4. Other business
The Workshop event will be held on Friday, 7 October 2016 in Sydney. The Assistant Minister for Cities and Digital Transformation, the Hon. Angus Taylor MP, will open the Workshop. 
Due to time constraints, other items were deferred to the Workshop.
