****** 4.1 – Confidence in the electoral system and political parties ******
We will work with the parliament and the public to investigate the conduct of
the 2016 election, use of technology in elections and the framework of
donations to political parties and other political entities.
Objective
To enhance integrity and confidence in Australia’s electoral system.
Status Quo
The Government has asked Parliament’s Joint Standing Committee on Electoral
Matters (JCSEM) to investigate a range of matters relating to the conduct of
the 2016 federal election, with particular attention to:
    * the potential application of new technology to casting, scrutinising and
      counting votes, and whether current authorisations requirements could be
      applied to all forms of communication; and
    * donations to political parties and other political entities, including
      the extent of donations being received from foreign sources and the
      options available to Parliament to regulate these types of donations.
      JSCEM will also be asked to look at the current donations disclosure
      regime and suggest any alternative approaches.
Ambition
To ensure that public confidence in Australia’s electoral system continues to
be strong.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values of accountability, transparency and
access to information by:
    * reducing the risk of undemocratic behaviour and conduct, which leads to
      the perception or reality of corrupt behaviour by politicians and
      political parties; and
    * increasing public confidence in Australian democracy.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * Increasing Public Integrity
Timeframes
September 2016 – 2017
Lead agency
Department of Finance and Australian Electoral Commission
Other actors involved
Government/ Parliament:Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters and the
Parliament of Australia
Non-government: Political parties and non-government organisations
Milestones
   1. JSCEM inquiry and report.
          o September 2016 – 2017 (subject to Committee reporting)
   2. Government considers recommendations.
          o 2017 (subject to Committee reporting)
   3. Parliament and other relevant stakeholders address Government decisions.
          o 2017 – Ongoing

[ a govspace site ]
