Number Content of submission
Theme
1.1 Treasury to share information for maximum public engagement. Reported in the Australian Financial Review on February 22:
Fiscal Transparency
“Treasury will accept more external advice after a review identified economic forecasting flaws that led successive governments
to spend big under the misapprehension of relentlessly strong resources-led growth.”
I have written about Treasury’s poor forecasting previously (here is a visual summary), and I agree with the AFR article: bad
forecasting has led to bad policy.
Much is made of budget transparency, but little is made of forecasting transparency. The assumptions of Treasury should be
open to the public. If Treasury will accept more external advice, it should not keep the information it shares with external parties
confidential. Treasury should share its information openly for maximum public engagement in forecasting, rather than accept the
biases of a few external parties.
Interestingly, the US has included participatory budgeting in its October 2015 OGP commitments. I am not advocating
participatory budgeting, only participatory forecasting.
1.2
1.3 Implement the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative in Australia.
PIAC recommends that the Commonwealth should publish, and negotiate for all state and territory government agencies to
publish, the aggregate amount paid in legal settlements and ex-gratia payments to non-employees by government agencies in
each financial year. (Recommendation 5)
Establish a publicly available register of the beneficial ownership of companies.
This is a commitment in the UK National Action Plan 2013 to 2015. This would build on the current ASIC company registry, but
would require the disclosure of beneficial owners, people who directly or indirectly own or control a company. It would need to be
an offence for a person to register a company and not disclose the beneficial owners and an offence for a person to be a
beneficial owner and not to have disclosed that fact. Shell companies with hidden ownership are used in a variety of
transnational crimes, from tax evasion, to money laundering, to bribery to the financing of terrorism. The current ASIC database
does not require the disclosure of beneficial owners, which has allowed front people to be used to hide the real owners of
businesses involved in criminal activity. The UK Government revealed that 6,150 people currently act as directors of more than
20 UK registered companies, with some people being directors in over 1,000 companies. A research report by World-Check had
previously shown that almost 4,000 people who are appear on various international watch lists are registered as directors of UK
companies.
This included 154 people allegedly involved in financial crime, 13 individuals wanted by Interpol for alleged terrorist activities and
37 accused of involvement in the drugs trade. No such data has ever been publicly disclosed for companies registered in
Australia.
1.4
1.4.1
Fiscal Transparency
Fiscal Transparency
Fiscal Transparency
Fiscal Transparency
Research by Findley, Nielson and Sharman also found Australian corporate service providers were near the top of corporate
service providers in terms of being willing to set up an untraceable shell company even when there was significant risk the
company in question would be used for illicit purposes.
The World Bank and UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) published a report reviewing some 150 cases of corruption where
the money from laundered. In the majority of cases:
•A corporate vehicle was misused to hide the money trail;
•The corporate vehicle in question was a company or corporation;
•The proceeds and instruments of corruption consisted of funds in a bank account; and
•In cases where the ownership information was available, the corporate vehicle in question was established or managed by a
professional intermediary.
In two-thirds of the cases some form of surrogate, in ownership or management, was used to increase the opacity of the
arrangement.In half the cases where a company was used to hide the proceeds of corruption, the company was a shell
company.One in seven of the companies misused were operational companies, that is ‘front companies’.
1.4.2
1.5
An OECD report into foreign bribery released in December 2014 found that in 25% of foreign bribery cases, the illicit money was
channelled through shadowy secret companies. The report listed the ways law enforcement was tricked by “... subsidiary
In 2015 the Australian Government endorsed the G20 High-Level Principles on Beneficial Ownership Transparency (see
Fiscal Transparency
http://www.mofa.go.jp/files/000059869.pdf ). Those principles provide a measure against which the implementation of this
commitment might be monitored.
High level summary of today's discussion. There were 9 people on the call: Andrew, Ashok, Cameron, Chandi (no microphone), Fiscal Transparency
Kevin, Rosie, Mark, Dez and myself. Within this theme 5 categories of actions were discussed: 1) Transparent forecasting of
budgets - revenue modelling and spending; 2) Campaign finance; 3) Ownership of companies; 4) Transparency of procurement
and grants; 5) Performance indicators and reporting of program spending. I encouraged participants to connect their suggestions
to the two Grand Challenges set by the Government and consider how they might be delivered as an OGP commitment. The
OGP NAP template was shared as a guide. We also discussed the need for agencies will need to take on responsibility as lead
agency for the delivery of actions and the need to cluster actions if we are to narrow them down to 5-15 commitments for the
NAP. Some participants will now add their actions to other them to other theme areas to reflect connections to Grand Challenges
and other actions suggested. A general overview of the event on the 11th April was provided including how actions outside the
Grand Challenges would be dealt with - i.e. commitment templates would be developed and actions could still be pursued but
they are unlikely to be included in the NAP. The question of budgets for delivery of OGPAU commitments was raised and budget
cycles were discussed. Ongoing engagement among participants was encouraged - participants will comment on this wiki and
consent was provided to share emails among the group. A follow up call for this theme will also be scheduled for next week.
Amelia
http://www.opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/files/attachments/Action%20Plan%20Template%
1.6 Fiscal Transparency
Greater transparency in public procurement: Governments should publish in a timely manner the selection criteria and
the method of award of any contract before the procurement process commences; Governments should collect and disclose the
identity and beneficial ownership of all bidders;
Full details of awarded contracts should be disclosed and the details of completion of the contract should be published in a timely
manner with any alterations to the terms of the original contract also disclosed; Independent monitoring of all stages of the
procurement process with a robust, transparent and effective appeals process should be accessible; Information on public
procurement should be available in open data format – non-proprietary, searchable, sortable, platform-independent and machine-
readable. Note: This needs more detail to be an actionable item. Have asked for more specific details from the proposer.(note
updated 23/12 - TB) Move the OAIC function into the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
1.7 Adopt 360Giving Data Standard in publishing grant data and build/leverage analysis tools to ensure grants are directed
Fiscal Transparency
equitably and strategically. http://www.threesixtygiving.org
The Commonwealth government is introducing grants.gov.au Similar to AusTenders, grants.gov.au is intended to publish as
Fiscal Transparency
open data grants administered by all Commonwealth agencies and is supposed to come online over the coming year. Currently
grants are published in a variety of formats (html, pdf, csv, excel) and the Guideline 412 applying to grant reporting is interpreted
differently from one agency to another which makes the data difficult to work with. Some quality issues such as DSS grants
providing only location of head office as opposed to the location where money is spent have been highlighted as a persistent
issue in the ANAO Report Delivery and Administration of Grant Programmes published on 15 March 2016
http://www.anao.gov.au/Publications/Audit-Reports/2015-2016/Delivery-and-Evaluation-of-Grant-Programmes
1.7.2
1.8
1.8.1
Participatory budgeting Participatory budgeting relies on deliberation for its success. I.e. "Voting" (if required) is the end stage of Fiscal Transparency
a long process which draws people into exchanging views, values and ideas, better understanding each other and leading to
better developed policy, which may be agreed by consensus. There is now a wealth of experience of how to make this work well
and flaws to avoid.
A good starting point would be to require Federal MPs to use participatory budgeting techniques to decide on projects to be
funded under the "Stronger Communities Programme" ($150,000 per MP)
My views on participatory budgeting is that it needs to be prefaced by budget transparency. There is a great deal of obfuscation Fiscal Transparency
in public debate regarding government spending which can be addressed through supporting budget transparency projects both
technically and financially. These projects require open budget data and also information regarding how funding flows to the
states and local government. Comprehensive and accurate budget transparency projects need to be based on detailed
understanding of the inner workings of how government administers funding, the kinds of questions that are not always
addressed in public facing documents. I'm starting a list of these on GitHub for developers working on budget apps at
https://github.com/forkinthecode/Budget-Transparency If you know the answers to the current questions - I'm all ears!
Breaking participatory budgeting down to specific programs is one way to avoid dealing with the bigger questions of where
money is going overall geographically & politically however these are very important questions that attract the interest of the
public, NGO's, media & government alike.
The Commonwealth has done a good job with federal budget data both in opening it and receiving ongoing feedback as to how it
can be improved however there is no infrastructure in Australia to fund these kinds of civic-lead projects that to be done properly
require significant input of expertise, labour and public engagement. Such projects are not traditionally business oriented so
unlikely to attract the interest of startup venture capitalists but the value of better analysis of spending patterns can not be
overlooked.1.9 Improved reporting of expenditure, major projects and departmental reporting
1) Regular publishing of government expenditure
records down to $1000. Currently federal government contracts over $10k
are reported in Australia through the AusTender website and
ondata.gov.au however, there are a lot of expenses below $10k that
arguably would be useful to know. In the UK they introduced expenditure
reporting per department monthly at https://data.gov.uk/data/openspending-report/index
2) A public register of all gov funded major projects (all types) along
with status, project manager and regular reporting. This would make it
easier to track major projects and to intervene when they are not
delivering.
3) Update of PBS and Annual Report templates for comparative budget and
program information with common key performance indicators and reporting
for programs and departmental functions. Right now agencies do their
reporting in PDF documents that provide no easy way to compare outcomes,
programs, expenditure, etc. If common XML templates were used for
common reports, comparative assessment would be easier and information
about government as a whole much more available for assessment.
(Full blog post on my personal submission at http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-submission/)
1.10 Fiscal Transparency
Governments don't know how to buy free software. Despite open government policies highlighting benefits of open source
software and open standards, government uptake
of open source is surprisingly low. Why? Because government purchasing practices inadvertently favour proprietary software
and vendor lock-in tactics over collaborative business practices used by open communities. There are multiple aspects to this,
which should be understood, leading to updated guidelines to government purchasing practices. Some considerations include:
How to compare long term value of open source and proprietary business models. How to assess the health of an open source
community and associated rate of innovation in order to properly assess the value of open source.How to assess a product's
claims of standards compliance. Some companies dissuade standards use by pricing extra for standards use, or limiting
standards based functionality.How to assess the quality and applicability of a standard, and whether to invest in influencing the
development of the standard.Typically government officials have mandate to solve department-wide problems, however open
source and open standards based solutions will often be best justified at a Whole-Of-Government, or Whole-Of-World level. One
particular argument is "If I invest in an open standard, or open source, I will see minimal immediate benefit, but long term will see
international adoption which will lead to advancement of my local goals."Government's asymmetric spending of discretionary
budgets at year-end disadvantages fee-for-service business models typically employed by open source businesses.
1.11 The Australian Government should endorse the principles of open contracting. In doing so Australia will build on the existing
foundation of transparency in procurement and contracting and, in consultation with civil society organisations and other
stakeholders, Australia should look at ways to enhance the scope, breadth and usability of published contractual data."
Fiscal Transparency
Fiscal Transparency
And as a complimentary measure, the Australian government will promote the principles of transparency and accountability in all
government-funded construction projects in the domestic and international arenas, including, in the period up until 2018, working
with others in government (eg Infrastructure Australia and in state counterparts) and civil society to identify suitable projects for
the application of the Construction Sector Transparency Initiative (CoST) in Australia, and using its bilateral and multilateral
relationships to encourage the establishment of at least four new national CoST programmes in countries where DFAT is
working. The Australian Government will continue to play a role in transforming the transparency of global development
assistance by publishing information on official development assistance (ODA) in line with the International Aid Transparency
Initiative (IATI) Standard, so that Australian assistance can be tracked through the delivery chain. In the 2014 Aid Transparency
Index (http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/index/2014-ati/ ) Australia's performance was rated to be Fair. It would be a great step
forward to aim to improve that rating to the Very Good category as a measy
1.11.1
1.12
1.2
1.3
My apology for the 'typo' I suggest that an aspiration for Australia's aid transparency to be assessed as in the Very Good
Category might be a measure of Australia's increased aid transparency.
The government has been incrementally improving its public reporting. The Federal Budget papers and supporting are now
made one the same evening or soon after thanks to the efforts of data.gov.au, and the ATO is publishing an extract of tax
statistics several years after the year in question.
With regard to the expenditure reporting, the lack of standardisation of programme naming schemes, and machinery of
government changes, makes it rather difficult to track expenditure across financial years. This is largely because it is reported at
an aggregate level in the budget papers. Seeing as agencies have to track at a finer level of detail for the purposes of running
the programmes themselves, they would have the information within their individual financial management information systems.
All of this information would be passed between agencies as part of any Machinery of Government change, so the information is
not lost. Perhaps as well as the budget papers, if agencies could report (at least at an aggregate / programme level) the level of
expenditure (Capex and Opex) for each programme we would attain greater visibility to how each agency is delivering the
programme.
On the revenue side, the ATO captures all of the information, and seems to have internal processes to filter the data to protect
the privacy of individuals prior to publication. It would be beneficial if that information on taxation revenue was available to the
public sooner. In a perfect world, published at the same time as Final Budget Outcome (FBO). This would provide people with (at
a year level) a view to detail as to government expenditure, and the revenue (or debt) that was taken on to achieve the outcomes
from that expenditure.
See the Open Contracting Data Standard - http://standard.open-contracting.org/latest/en/) by the Open Contracting Partnership -
http://www.open-contracting.org
Australian Governments are committed to substantial investment in infrastructure. To ensure the integrity, efficiency and
effectiveness of that investment, Australian Governments should endorse the principles of open contracting (http://www.open-
contracting.org/). In doing so Australia will build on the existing foundation of transparency in procurement and contracting and,
in consultation with civil society organisations and other stakeholders, Australia should look at ways to enhance the scope,
breadth and usability of published contractual data." http://www.open-contracting.org/data-standard/
Fiscal Transparency
Fiscal Transparency
Fiscal Transparency
Fiscal Transparency2.1
Open up the procurement process to facilitate greater participation and public sector innovation
Fostering Innovation
There's scope here to link the Government's OGP commitments to a new initiative in its National Innovation and Science
Agenda, which states: “We will challenge small to medium enterprises to deliver innovative solutions for government, rather than
tendering for an existing product.”
Opening up the procurement process in this way -- over and above mere transparency – will facilitate greater participation and
public sector innovation. It requires a commitment to an open innovation model, replacing or expanding existing tendering
systems with open innovation platforms. A culture of openness early in policy program development is needed; current
procurement focuses on outputs rather than outcomes, with little early external participation to validate the appropriateness of
the outputs.
Innovation Australia's 2014 submission to the Inquiry into Commonwealth Procurement Procedures articulated it this way:
"Agencies contemplating tenders should be required to give adequate notice of their intentions and take submissions regarding
innovative possibilities."
2.2
2.3
2.4
Wisdom Pledge. Firstly, the first step is to make a wisdom pledge which is a commitment to consider Zero Marginal Cost
Fostering Innovation
technologies to pursue Society Growth ( wisdom.to/pledge ) . Secondly, the Australian Government could consider a Network
Democracy platform which restores the balance with real-time, comprehensive citizen participation across government,
democracy and industry" ( wisdom.to/networkdemocracy ). Network Democracy could provide transparent participation and
collaboration across every government department and agency. Thirdly, Health Wisdom could provide nationwide collaboration
between doctors, patients, nurses and other caregivers ( wisdom.to/health ). This could evolve in the Australia Wisdom Network
which crowd creates Network Society ( wisdom.to/australia ).
Encourage and enable the delivery unsolicited proposals if they are in the public interest
Fostering Innovation
Establish an open and transparent process to encourage unsolicited proposals from the public, business and industry. This
would enable all levels of business to contribute not only ideas but infrastructure, services, and alternative business models to
support the delivery of public services and infrastructure. The process could be made more open and efficient by: 1) creating an
online platform to crowd source and encourage proposal pitching; 2) inviting public participation through a representative sample
of the population who would be able to develop a criteria for evaluation and / or consider the proposals on an occasional basis /
biannually or quarterly through a deliberative process that considers context, impacts, requirements to deliver and weighs up
pros and cons of various options suggested. 3) A format or basic criteria for proposals and pitches so the public know what they
can expect and proposals are well formed for consideration. 4) An internal taskforce to coordinate (and communicate)
Government processes to enables the delivery of these proposals including transparent approval process, allocation of funding
and other support mechanisms provided. This process could start small as a pilot with a stated quantity of funds and public
resources allocated to invite and encourage proposals and a criteria establish to evaluate them.
Procuring innovation. To genuinely innovate the Federal Government should establish processes that enable collaboration inside Fostering Innovation
and outside of the public sector, especially when problems are complex and input is required from non-government
organisations to test understanding and explore potential impacts. To enable collaboration in these matters Government need to
be able to procure services to co-design, prototype and test solutions when outcomes can not be known, and those involved
need to provide fluid services. The responsive nature of this type of services design and solving problem makes it almost
impossible for Government and its service providers to define exactly what will be required when the project commences. While
it is commonly understood that this type of responsive service and collaboration is required, it is not currently possible to procure
these types of services within traditional procurement models.
Increasingly, and especially in the context of start-ups, small and agile innovators and innovative companies, Government need
to be able to procure innovators, not innovations. The ability to more rapidly identify players - people and organisations - who not
only ‘get it’ but have even a remote chance of 'getting it done’ in areas where new ideas, different approaches and genuine
innovation is being sought is itself a key challenge. Agencies need scope to find and engage individuals whose experience,
insights and approach make them ideal partners forexploration phases, and when continuing and evolving innovation.
Government also should consider supporting people and the organisations they need to involve when co-designing, prototyping
and testing ideas and approaches. The current focus on procurement process, especially when innovative outcomes are being
sought, can itself generate adverse outcomes in terms of efficiency, fairness and productivity. Asking people and organisations
good at the new dynamic of design, rapid testing of multiple prototypes and eventual scaling of successful solutions, to bend
their skills to participate in slower more cumbersome, complex and time consuming procurement processes is limiting the scope
of providers and creative options available to Government.
Perhaps there could be a different space seyt up adjacent to the more formal procurement process with clear expectations set
(and adhered to) about the ability to play in the larger and more formal procurement processes when it comes time to buy a
solution at scale.This additional space would provide for the necessary legibility of process (who is involved, on what terms etc)
while at the same time providing for more flexible and less onerous process provisions to nurture faster, more open and iterative
conversations and exchanges.
2.4.1
I agree with this suggestion.
Fostering Innovation
The following is an expansion on the ideas and a possible action item for OGPAU.
It is difficult to introduce innovation into government or any large organization. Christensen described it in "The Innovator’s
Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail". What is true for commercial organizations is relevant to
governments.
The best chance of government innovation is to leave existing systems as they are. Instead of trying to change existing systems
keep innovation outside existing systems. But have ways to allow innovations to connect to existing systems. Existing systems
can then evolve. The way we connect systems is the key to innovation adoption.
Innovation requires the participation of organizations who have the responsibility for "business as usual". They need to co-create
the innovations with an eye to integration if successful. This co-creation should also involve the parties who are the beneficiaries
of government services.
A dampener on innovation is the political process. Innovation requires a by-partisan approach. Keeping innovation out of the
political process benefits all. Innovation and change is an ongoing process not a once off. It goes beyond the electoral cycle.
Arranged well all parties can share in the credit and take no blame.
Within these constraints we can structure a process for innovation. A possible process may be along the following lines.
An innovation must be demonstrable "in the small". It must be something that will work with a few participants. This is Minimum
Viable Product idea.
An innovation must integrate with existing systems without changing existing systems. This means systems are autonomous.
Neither depends on the other.
An innovation is co-created. Possible participants are the proposers, agencies and the beneficiaries of the services.
An innovation must be able to show how it adds value to the community. Value extends beyond monetary measures. When
realised the monetary value is available to fund future innovations.
2.5
Enabling place based reform through cross sector collaboration
Fostering Innovation
The Federal Government should lead the collation of place-based data – both activity and outcome data – and support localised
sense making.Open data that builds understanding of the outcomes of citizens will create the enabling conditions for place
based reform.However, open data in itself is not enough.Data needs to be shared in ways that are useable and easily
consumable - preferably in visual form.And further, the Federal Government needs to play a role in supporting sense making
through analysis and dialog.Place based reform is dependant on inputs and processes that build a shared understanding of
complex problems and shared approaches to making large scale social change.
Two live examples of the need for open data, that is citizen centred and visual is Maranguka's Justice Reinvestment Initiative for
Bourke and Empowered Communities.PM&C is involved in both the emerging initiatives.
Place based reform process will improve the delivery and cost-effectiveness of public services.Localised change agendas -
developed by all sectors - will guide the design and delivery of public services so they better meet local priorities, are more
flexible and responsive, and are less duplicative and fragmented.priorities, such as child development, poverty reduction, crime
prevention, employment and housing.
2.5.1
2.5.2
2.6
This suggestion seems consistent with the UK's approach of "City Data Infrastructure" discussed for example here:
http://theodi.org/smart-cities and here: http://theodi.org/data-infrastructure
Yes, Yes and Yes. If this can be done using open APIs and access to open and shared data (see post my in service delivery)
and supported by external parties (who community data warehouse like www.communityinfo.org.au) this isn't just possibility is
can happen quickly and cheaply!
Superannuation. Require that .5% of superannuation is put into Venture Capital (Innovation) Projects
Fostering Innovation
Fostering Innovation
Fostering Innovation2.7
2.8
2.9
Open Data/Open Government Cooperative Research Centre. BudgetAus
Fostering Innovation
I can't see this Commitment idea in any of the themes so I'm adding it here: An open data/open government Cooperative
Research Centre would provide the infrastructure and research commitment required to make use of open data in the Australian
context for policy, business and research purposes. It would also hook up the government's Innovation program with the open
government agenda.
Innovations of their nature are difficult to procure as they are unknown. Innovations can be procured by procuring experiments. Fostering Innovation
The procurement process assumes the government knows what it is buying.If it is an innovation then it is unknown. Buying or
promoting the unknown is risky.
One way to introduce innovations is to do it as a co-creation activity in isolation and as an experiment.The experimental method
looks for failure.If the experiment fails that is a success.If the experiment does not fail the innovation is a success.
We have an innovation to open personal data to the person.It could be used for a co-creation experiment.
Commitment : Reform the procurement process making it easier for people and businesses to work with, and collaborate with
government.
Fostering Innovation
The closed nature of the existing procurement panel process to get on a government supplier list, is an obstacle for government
agencies being able to innovate, and find new service providers and SMEs to work with or collaborate with.
2.10
The existing categories use old terminology and do not reflect contemporary roles and services. The government should open
the lists and create new service categories to enable fresh people, ideas, approaches, and techniques.
Addresses : Fostering Innovation, Access to Information, Public Participation, Improve Public Service Improvement and Delivery Fostering Innovation
Commitment : Review the Australian Intellectual Property Rules with public and private sector participation. Create and publish
useful, open and educational information for government staff, and service providers and citizens about where rules apply and
where there are exceptions, particularly in relation to procurement.
Context :
The Australian Government position on IP can be confusing, is at times contradictory and can be easily misunderstood by
internal government staff as well as external service providers.
Across agencies and all levels of government across the nation different rules apply. There is a lack of consistency, transparency
and explanation as to why there are different stances with regard to IP and copyright.
For example - the default position for the Australian Government and NSW Government is that ICT providers and SMEs to retain
their IP in order to benefit from their ideas and foster innovation. However, this seems to change between agencies and
jurisdictions. It would be enormously helpful to provide clarity around IP and copyright to make it easier to do business with and
collaborate with government.
Suggestion:
It is the opportune time review this, provide frameworks and scenarios of best practices to complement the launch of the National
Innovation and Science Agenda.
This will help drive government and private sector innovation, encourage collaboration with government, researchers and
universities.
To help foster content innovation, a review of how Crown copyright is used and applicable, and a move to a creative commons
licensing frameworks is required. Content should be able to be openly shared and reused, and where appropriate distributed
through multiple channels to reach the broadest possible audience.
2.11
2.12
2.13
This will encourage the uptake of creative commons, as well as provide opportunities to create an ecosystem of content
innovators and the creation of original local content in collaboration with agencies and other organisations such as museums.
It would be great to be able to have groups of students involved in the innovation process around open data with government
agencies. They will provide a valuable perspective, as digital natives, future users and employees of government agencies.
Fostering Innovation
Many agencies of a reasonable size have an internal software development capability. These intrepid souls cut the code to build Fostering Innovation
and maintain software capability to deliver agency outcomes. In some cases these solutions are delivered to citizens with the
high transaction variety now fall within the Digital Transformation Office remit.
To support Open Government, perhaps start small and encourage Agencies to share code amongst themselves as a stepping
stone to open the software to citizens. Agencies could publish their internally developed code (production versions) to a central
repository that could be indexed and searched by other agencies. Perhaps an Agency only version of the GitHub used by the
DTO? This would help promote reuse within Agencies and allow the public service and its agents with a broader mechanism to
solve challenges. Perhaps with such a mechanism once software is considered mature enough it is published externally so it can
be made "Open" to the community at large.
Innovation requires the right environment. Innovative ideas that eventually turn into successful products, services or processes
Fostering Innovation
are rewarded in the private sector. However, in the public sector, it is usually a pat on the back- there is seldom any reward. If an
idea fails in the public sector, the consequences are negative for everyone in that chain of command: negative press coverage,
complaints from the public, questions about sensible resource utilisation... You can imagine the headlines in the newspaper!
In a society that punishes failures disproportionately compared to rewards given to winners, innovation will remain stagnant. Let
us call this the external innovation culture since it is external to the group that is trying to innovate.
The fear and reluctance for trying out new ideas is compounded in an environment where there is no profit motive. In an
environment where status-quo is the norm, and management does not like to go out of its comfort zone, established norms or
ways of doing things is not questioned, and anyone who does so is ignored, frowned upon or gently cast aside. I call this the
internal innovation culture. This internal culture has to change to make governments more innovative, transparent and efficient.
Solutions
Changing the External Innovation Culture
Political consensus will greatly help soften external culture. If the major political parties are agreed upon trying out, for example,
20 new ideas at CentreLink, the risk of criticism towards the ruling government and department head would greatly be reduced
even if half of them fail. If such a consensus is arrived at, accompanied by enthusiastic participation from civil society or groups,
then the risk of negative media coverage will also be reduced. The overall winner would be an innovative public services.
Changing the Internal Innovation Culture
Hiring workers from outside the APS into all levels of the APS, particularly the higher EL1, EL2 and SES levels will infuse a new
way of thinking. This can be done, for example, by including prominent players from the private sector in hiring panels of SES
jobs. This will infuse new blood into the APS. Once we have people within the APS who think outside the box, who do not
hesitate to be different and act different, they will innovate (or at least encourage and allow innovation by others). They will be
less risk averse and more tolerant towards failures. They will provide innovative solutions to customers without customers having
to come up with new ideas. The current system of a public service that is desensitised to public needs will change over time.
Changing the internal and external innovation cultures will help citizens be served better, reduce corruption and lead to
adaptation of new technologies and methods, thereby lead to a strong participatory democracy and improve transparency, This
will in turn improve innovativeness. Innovation begets innovation!
2.14
2.15
Rather than focus on innovation, reward and promote solutions in local communities and public service delivery. Develop simple Fostering Innovation
payment models that pay 5-10% of savings. Innovation is about investment in outcomes not investment in innovation as an
activity.
Innovations of their nature are difficult to procure as they are unknown. Innovations can be procured by procuring experiments. Fostering Innovation
The procurement process assumes the government knows what it is buying. If it is an innovation then it is unknown. Buying or
promoting the unknown is risky.
One way to introduce innovations is to do it as a co-creation activity in isolation and as an experiment. The experimental method
looks for failure. If the experiment fails that is a success. If the experiment does not fail the innovation is a success.
We have an innovation to open personal data to the person. It could be used for a co-creation experiment.
2.16
I can't see this Commitment idea in any of the themes so I'm adding it here: An open data/open government Cooperative
Fostering Innovation
Research Centre would provide the infrastructure and research commitment required to make use of open data in the Australian
context for policy, business and research purposes. It would also hook up the government's Innovation program with the open
government agenda.2.17 6 people attended this call: Ken, Kevin, Ashkor, Rosie, Andrew and I. We discussed: 1) Procuring outcomes not services -
Fostering Innovation
actions suggested by Martin, Kevin, Andrew and whether this went some way to addressing Marcus' suggestion; 2) The
importance of building capabilities, empowering and supporting those wishing to innovate and use data and empowerment
possibly through a CRC as suggested by Rosie. I mentioned Brentyn's suggestion, Kerry Graham's suggestion and ODI, Code
for Australia, Open Australia were discussed as key ways to support those wishing to use data to innovate and open gov. 3)
'Cross fertilisation' - the importance of enabling innovation, codesign and collaboration across sectors - was discussed in relation
to the two points above. Ashkor has added some points about how Government agencies might better enable this to this theme.
4) Program design and delivery - how effectiveness if measured was raised. I suggested this by added to the improving services
and open data themes. The need to connect actions to challenges was discussed as was the importance of pilot projects and
milestones. Thanks to everyone who participated. Amelia
2.18 Superannuation into Social Impact Bonds: Require 1% of Superannuation goes into Social Impact Bonds with Government
Guarantees
Require that .5% of superannuation is put into Venture Capital (Innovation) Projects
Fostering innovation
2.19
2.2
Fostering Innovation
Fostering Innovation
Fostering Innovation
There are some important comments already noted here but to add to them, the panel process could be improved by providing a
mechanism to track projects or related work through the panels.
2.3
This is just a start and I look forward to participating further in the development of the OGPau - Australian Government NAP on
behalf of Adelphi Digital.
Fostering innovation
- Action: Innovation in government
- Description: Pilot program to capture and measure government innovation activity (activity/output, outcome and impact
indicators).
Fostering Innovation3.1 Practical aspects of using and maintaining information. Australia has an open by default policy for government data. A great first Freedom of Information
step, but of minimal value until the data is readily usable. Yes, a bus timetable is useful when a paper copy of it is distributed to
commuters every 6 months. But it is super useful when bus timetables are integrated with real-time bus and traffic data travel
plans can be adjusted accordingly. This is facilitated by the concept of "mashable government" where government data is made
available in machine readable form via standards based Application Programmer Interfaces (APIs). Cross agency integration of
datasets can open up significant value, but usually requires addressing of technical, financial, legal and social challenges.
Agencies need to agree upon common formats for common datasets (typically through use open standards). Who benefits from
aggregated datasets is usually different to those who collects and maintains the data. As such, solving integration issues often
requires creative, cross-agency, business cases to be crafted.The National Action Plan should discuss: Mashable Government,
APIs, use/extend/create open standards (in that order), writing business cases to identify high value datasets, and cross-agency
funding of data management strategies.
3.1.1 Agree. Usability of open or shared data remains one of the biggest challenges. Until this challenge is addressed open data
Freedom of Information
cannot possibly deliver outcomes near to the prospectus of promise it was sold on.
Absolutely - This is an important part of PiaWaugh submission Mandated open Application Programmable Interfaces (APIs) for Freedom of Information
all citizen and business facing services delivered or commissioned by government
Adoption of rightoknow platform for whole of gov with central FOI register and publications, and a central FOI team to work
Freedom of Information
across all departments consistently for responding to requests. Currently doing an FOI request can be tricky to figure out (unless
you can find community initiatives like righttoknow which has automated the process externally) and the approach to FOI
requests varies quite dramatically across departments. A single official way to submit requests, track them, and see reports
published, as well as a single mechanism to respond to requests would be better for the citizen experience and far more efficient
for government. (Full blog post on my personal submission at http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-submission/)
3.1.2
3.2
3.3
Review of Australia's access to information law and practice
Commitment: To undertakea review of the Freedom of Information Act and its implementation by agencies and ministers by a
panel of experts drawn from government and civil society to report
within 6 months on ways to improve and enhance Australian law and practice in accordance with widely accepted best practice
standards in this country and internationally.
Freedom of Information
Rationale: Access to government information, guaranteed by law, is a cornerstone of democracy. As former Australian
Information Commissioner Professor John McMillan said recently (http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/commitment-to-
freedom-of-information-bolsters-our-democracy/news-story/a76fe5aa312e04ff728d4fe9b80bd09a)
"The FoI Act ushered in a new era of open government in 1982. Ever since, government in Australia has been more responsive,
engaged and transparent. The Australian lead was followed in many other countries. And yes, the FoI Act is not perfect. It
doesn’t balance well the administrative demands on government with the ideal of public access to government information. Many
recommendations for reform have been made during the past five years by the OAIC and others. There has been scant
government consideration of those proposals, at least outside the bunker.There is an urgent need for constructive debate on
future directions in FoI. No political party can truly claim to subscribe to a policy of open government while this impasse
continues."
A wide range of experts outside government have serious concerns about the current state of the law and the practices adopted
in many government agencies. The development of the national action plan provides the opportunity for discussion and debate
about much needed reform.
The Centre for Law and Democracy (Canada) rated the Federal FOI act 51 of 104 right to information laws reviewed, awarding
83 points out of a possible 150. Since that assessment the Government announced its intention to abolish the Office of
Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC). If the bill, still before the Senate, passed into law a further drop in international
standing would follow.
Serious consideration of other reforms will be constrained while the Government maintains its position that the OAIC should be
abolished and in the meantime that funding for the office notextend to the full range of its functions.
3.4
3.5
Recommendations put forward but not discussed “outside the bunker” to use Professor McMillan’s words, include those
contained in the Australian Law Reform Commission 2009 report Secrecy Laws and Open Government; the report by Dr Allan
Australia's independent watchdog and advocate for open government. As a number of others have proposed the Government
Freedom of Information
should withdraw the Freedom of Information Amendment (New Arrangements) Bill which has been before the Senate since
October 2014 and not brought on for a vote because it does not enjoy majority support. In the meantime reduced funding for the
OAIC has meant the office does not carry out some functions conferred on it by Parliament and has a limited capacity to carry
out others. As Dr Lidberg's research identifies, cultural change in the direction of openness and transparency is more important
in achieving the objectives that underpin freedom of information than changes to the law, but clearly culture and a modern well
balanced law that reflects Australian and international good practice are both important. Australia cannot credibly support the
OGP and explore reforms on the home front to advance transparent open government and increased citizen participation while
planning to abolish the office of information commissioner, the body established by parliament to play a key role in advancing
those same objectives.
Amendmends to FOI laws- Based on the article and my other research (2001-2016) here are my recommendations re
Freedom of Information
information access in Australia’s OGP national plan in dot points.
•Culture change of the administration of FOI is more important than legal reform and change. Put more effort into FOI guidelines
issued fromministers and heads of department – see the WA example in the article. These guidelines should make it clear that
the task of public servants is to facilitate FOI requests and that a fast as possible processing time should be a priority.
•Re-fund the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC). Re-appoint the Information Commissioner and FOI
Commissioner.
•Aim to change the current ‘pull’ information culture to a ‘push’ one. All information should be considered public and the public
servantsshould have to justify why a generated document should not be public.
Legal reforms:
•Amend FOI laws to include a FOI/Information Commissioner in all Australian jurisdictions modelled on the OAIC
•Implement the FOI disclosure logs across all FOI jurisdictions and task the FOI/Info commissioner with following up the
implementation and use of the disclosure logs. ALL
•Scrap the $30 FOI request fee – it sends the wrong signals.
•Introduce a public interest request category – if the request qualifies in this category – processing fees should not be charged.
The default should be not to charge fees.
•Amend the FOI laws in all Australian jurisdictions to include all government agencies modelled on best practice legislations in
countries like Sweden and the US where no government agencies are exempt. Exempting agencies signals secrecy instead of
transparency. Documents from security agencies may be redacted, but it is an important step in changing the administrative
culture from secrecy to openness.
3.6
Transparency on customs data. Follow the example of other countries, such as the US and India, and make customs data
publicly available, so that government is not hiding where companies are sourcing products from. Making key data about
imported products publicly available would allow greater ability to detect where Australian importers are dealing with suppliers
where there is the presence of criminal activity, human rights abuses and/or unlawful environmental destruction and the source
jurisdiction has failed to take effective action to stop the criminal abuse. This would have a deterrent impact on the risks
Australian importers are willing to take in dealing with suppliers where there is significant risk of criminal activity and human
rights abuses being present, out of concern of reputational risk.
Freedom of Information
Currently information about imports is recorded through the Australian Government’s Integrated Cargo System (ICS) and
includes the type of product, quantity, the supplier and the recipient. In other jurisdictions, including the United States, the EU
and India, this data is made publicly available. However, import data collected through Australia’s ICS is not made public. Limited
statistical data from ICS is made available to the Australian Bureau of Statics for research purposes.
In the jurisdictions where customs data is publicly available there is no evidence of any significant impact on commercial
activities or the proper functioning of markets. There is evidence that it has assisted importers in those jurisdictions to be made
aware of risks of human rights abuses and criminal activity in relation to suppliers they are sourcing from.
3.7
Strengthen FOI Freedom of Information
Freedom of Information
1. Reverse the proposed changes to the OAIC regime by withdrawing legislation to abolish the Office, re-instating funding to the
level
necessary for it to be able to fulfilits freedom of information, privacy, and information policy functions , and ensuring the prompt
appointment of a new Australian Information Commissioner and Freedom of Information Commissioner.
2.Establish a comprehensive review of the FOI Act, as proposed by the 2013 Hawke Review (rec 1).
3.Add to the list of items suggested by Hawke for consideration a.the addition of public interest tests to other exemptions such as
the exemptions for trade secrets etc and breach of confidence; b.the removal of exclusions for specific bodies, including national
security agencies and parliamentary departments; and c.the implementation of further measures to improve the transparency of
government procurement processes and government contracts.3.8
Ensure better Freedom of Information. Societies are not served by secretive governments and indeed democracies are better
for opening up the processes that form policy and theadministrative framework of government, both parliament and the public
service.
Freedom of Information
Actionable 1: Remove the Bill to abolish the OAIC. Fund the OAIC to ensure proper resources to fulfil role to a high level and to
avoid backlogs.
Actionable 2:Improve data publishing including publishing ministerial and briefings as a matter of course to allow public
participation in the formation of policy.A working group might ascertain the appropriate time period before publication.
Actionable 3:Look at removing all agency exemptions to the FOI Act including parliamentary departments and national security
agencies.There are existing exemptions that agencies might utilise in weighing up FOI applications for information, especially
around national security.
Actionable 4:Implement workshops within the public service to ensure that staff are aware of agency obligations under the FOI
Act in the same way that mandatory security awareness workshops are managed.
Actionable 5:Centralise the FOI disclosure logs to one site with each agency can access using their own password for uploading
documents.A user-friendly search function using keywords would harness documents from a number of different agencies on a
particular topic. This would aid in academic research as well as expanding information available for citizens to make informed
choices.It also would reduce pressure on FOI if information is easily sourced.
Actionable 6:Include private contractors in the FOI Act to ensure proper scrutiny of the use of public monies. Transferring the
same standards of governance, accountability and transparency to businesses that perform government functions is a
fundamental aspect of democracy.
3.9 Amend the FOI act Amend the Commonwealth FOI Act to make the section 47 exemption (trade secrets or commercially
valuable information) subject
to the public interest test, at least where s 47(3) applies (i.e. government-held trade secrets or commercially valuable
information.
3.10 Introduction fo a fair use exception to copyright law. Australia's Copyright legislation creates many problems for libraries, cultural Freedom of Information
and education institutions to manage and reuse government resources. The review conducted by the ALRC on 'Copyright and
the digital economy' addressed many issues and its recommendations would go a long way to improving access and use of
government information.
Freedom of Information
The ALRC was asked to consider whether the current exceptions and statutory licences in the Copyright Act are adequate and
appropriate in the digital era. The Report, tabled on 13 February 2014, is the result of an 18-month Inquiry during which the
ALRC produced two consultation documents, undertook 109 consultations and received 870 submissions. The Report contains
30 recommendations for reform. The key recommendation is for the introduction of a fair use exception to Australian copyright
law.
3.11
At present government agencies ask people for information that the agencies then check. Instead allow people to confirm
information about themselves before passing it on to agencies.
3.11.1
3.12
3.13
3.14
3.15
Freedom of Information
Freedom of Information
However, it should be noted that 90% of all FOI request are for personal information held by organizations. Accordingly this
proposal has been moved to public service delivery because it is about improving the efficiency. It could possibly fund FOI
requests of all types from the savings made on personal information FOI.
Encourage government agencies to follow Privacy Principle 12. In particular 12.4(b)."give access to the information in the
manner requested by the individual, if it is reasonable and practicable to do so".
Freedom of Information
Reinstate the OAIC by withdrawing legislation to abolish the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner, re-instating
Freedom of Information
funding for the OAIC to fulfil its mandate in relation to
freedom of information, privacy, and information policy, and ensuring the prompt appointment of a new Australian Information
Commissioner with full powers.
Establish a review of the operation of the OAIC to commence at the start of 2017 and to cover the period from its creation in
Freedom of Information
2010 to the end of 2016.
My suggestion is that most Cabinet papers be released within weeks of Cabinet decisions, excluding those documents relating to Freedom of Information
security, defence or international relations. The 20 year rule is unnecessary for the majority of Cabinet documents. Where
Cabinet papers touch on commercial-in-confidence matters, then a process of redaction will be necessary.
Timely release of Cabinet documents will help forge a community consensus on difficult but necessary reforms/decisions by
disclosing all information used to make those decisions. Over time it will also promote a culture of evidence-based policy
development.
Where a Cabinet decision does not follow bureaucratic advice and underlying evidence, then this is clear to the community, and
it is then up to the Cabinet to publicly justify that departure.
It is desirable that a Federal Cabinet be free to make decisions against bureaucratic advice (e.g. to fulfill an election promise),
but the community will benefit from knowing where and when then these differences arise and the basis on which advice
bureaucratic advice was not taken.
3.16
Review of Australia's access to information law and practice. Commitment: To undertake a review of the Freedom of Information Freedom of Information
Act and its implementation by agencies and ministers by a panel of experts drawn from government and civil society to report
within 6 months on ways to improve and enhance Australian law and practice in accordance with widely accepted best practice
standards in this country and internationally.
Rationale:
Access to government information, guaranteed by law, is a cornerstone of democracy.
As former Australian Information Commissioner Professor John McMillan said recently
(http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/commitment-to-freedom-of-information-bolsters-our-democracy/news-
story/a76fe5aa312e04ff728d4fe9b80bd09a)
"The FoI Act ushered in a new era of open government in 1982. Ever since, government in Australia has been more responsive,
engaged and transparent. The Australian lead was followed in many other countries. And yes, the FoI Act is not perfect. It
doesn’t balance well the -administrative demands on government with the ideal of public access to government information.
Many recommendations for reform have been made during the past five years by the OAIC and others. There has been scant
government consideration of those proposals, at least outside the bunker.There is an urgent need for constructive debate on
future directions in FoI. No political party can truly claim to subscribe to a policy of open government while this impasse
continues."
A wide range of experts outside government have serious concerns about the current state of the law and the practices adopted
in many government agencies.
The development of the national action plan provides the opportunity for discussion and debate about much needed reform.
The Centre for Law and Democracy (Canada) rated the Federal FOI act 51 of 104 right to information laws reviewed, awarding
83 points out of a possible 150.
Since that assessment the Government announced its intention to abolish the Office of Australian Information Commissioner
(OAIC). If the bill, still before the Senate, passed into law a further drop in international standing would follow.
3.17
Serious consideration of other reforms will be constrained while the Government maintains its position that the OAIC should be
Kevin and Ken joined me on this call and our discussions focused on Kevin's suggested actions around the use of personal data Freedom of Information
and the release of publications. I suggested Kevin connect his actions to a) the management of data as a resource; and b) ways
personal data might be used to improve public services. He will also add a comment to the opendata theme. Ken will add a
comment about the release of publications to the opendata and resource management themes. Amelia3.18
OGP Access to information/FOI points Dr Johan Lidberg, School of Media, Film and Journalism, Monash University
Freedom of Information
I’ve pasted the abstract, discussion and conclusion from a research article that will be published in the July edition of the
Australian Journalism Review. The article is under copyright, so I can’t paste the full paper here – but the abstract and
discussion and conclusions provides the core of the findings and argument. The article will be available in full from July 2016.
The points below also applies to some of the actions needed in the Open Data section,
Based on the article and my other research (2001-2016) here are my recommendations re information access in Australia’s OGP
national plan in dot points.
• Culture change of the administration of FOI is more important than legal reform and change. Put more effort into FOI guidelines
issued from ministers and heads of department – see the WA example in the article. These guidelines should make it clear that
the task of public servants is to facilitate FOI requests and that a fast as possible processing time should be a priority.
• Re-fund the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC). Re-appoint the Information Commissioner and FOI
Commissioner.
• Aim to change the current ‘pull’ information culture to a ‘push’ one. All information should be considered public and the public
servants should have to justify why a generated document should not be public.
Legal reforms:
• Amend FOI laws to include a FOI/Information Commissioner in all Australian jurisdictions modelled on the OAIC
• Implement the FOI disclosure logs across all FOI jurisdictions and task the FOI/Info commissioner with following up the
implementation and use of the disclosure logs. ALL
• Scrap the $30 FOI request fee – it sends the wrong signals.
3.19
• Introduce a public interest request category – if the request qualifies in this category – processing fees should not be charged.
The default should be not to charge fees.
Metrics to assess utilisation of information access rights: State and Territory Information Commissioners/Officers/Ombudsmen
responsible for upholding, reviewing and determining information access rights have agreed to collectively contribute to the
development of a set of metrics to assess public utilisation of information access rights in Australia. These measures may
include:
Freedom of Information
Applicant by type
Application rates per capita
Reviews as a % of application numbers
Release rates
Refusal rates
The development and collection of data to inform an assessment of the utilisation of information access rights within Australian
States and Territories is unprecedented. The metrics will assist in building a more complete picture of open government, with a
focus on use of traditional and established 'pull pathways' to access information rights. Benefits include increasing awareness
and transparency of citizen activation of these rights to access government information, together with a comprehensive
quantitative data set to use as a baseline for future evaluation. This baseline and the assessment approach more broadly may
be applied to contribute to the overall assessment of Australia's Open Government National Action Plan.
NSW Information Commissioner, Elizabeth Tydd
WA Information Commissioner, Sven Bluemmel
Victoria Acting Freedom of Information Commissioner, Michael Ison
QLD Information Commissioner, Rachael Rangihaeata
NT Information Commissioner, Brenda Monaghan
SA Ombudsman, Wayne Lines
Tasmania Ombudsman, Richard Connock
3.20
The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) has provided a submission to the consultation. A summary is available of our
recommendations relevant to freedom of information:
- PIAC recommends that the Australian Government commit to restoring funding for the OAIC across the forward estimates, or
create an effective alternative that can properly perform the functions that the OAIC was created to fulfil. (Recommendation 2)
- PIAC recommends that the Government implement the following recommendations of the Hawke Review:
• certain agencies should be required to justify their complete exemption from the FOI regime to the Attorney-General within a
twelve-month period (Recommendation 19);
• the Act should be amended to provide that the Information Commissioner can declare requests to be ‘vexatious requests’
rather than empowering the Information Commissioner to declare applicants to be vexatious applicants (Recommendation 32);
and
• FOI applicants should have a period of exclusivity with documents they have requested before those documents are publicly
released (Recommendation 37). (Recommendation 3, PIAC submission)
Freedom of Information4.1 Adoption of the recommendations from the Independent Parliamentary Entitlements System Report. I also wholeheartedly
support the recommendations of the Independent Parliamentary Entitlements System Report
(https://www.dpmc.gov.au/taskforces/review-parliamentary-entitlements), in particular:
Recommendation 24: publish all key documents online;
Recommendation 25: more frequent reporting (of work expenses of parliamentarians and their staff) on data.gov.au as a
dataset;
Recommendation 26: improved travel reporting by Parliamentarians.
(Full blog post on my personal submission at http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-submission/)
4.2 Better transparency and reporting of contracted work. A consistent reporting approach and public access to details of outsourced Government Integrity
contract work with greater consistency of confidentiality rules in procurement. A lot of work is outsourced by government to third
parties. This can be a good way to deliver some things (and there are many arguments as to how much outsourcing is too much)
however, it introduces a serious transparency issue when the information about contracted work is unable to be monitored, with
the excuse of "commercial in confidence". All contracts should have minimum reporting requirements and should make publicly
available the details of what exactly is contracted, with the exception of contracts with national security where such disclosure
creates a significant risk. This would also help in creating a motivation for contractors to deliver on their contractual obligations.
Finally, if procurement officers across government had enhanced training to correctly apply the existing confidentiality test from
the Commonwealth Procurement Rules, it would be reasonably to expect that there would be less information hidden behind
commercial in confidence.(Full blog post on my personal submission at http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-
submission/)
Retrospective open calendars of all Parliamentarians business calendars. Constituents deserve to know how their
Government Integrity
representatives are using their time and, in particular, who they are meeting with. This helps improve transparency around
potential influencers of public policy, and helps encourage Parliamentarians to consider how they spend their time in office. (full
blog post on my personal submission at http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-submission/)
4.3
Government Integrity
4.4 Apart from the obvious actions required in the area of training, having an efficient feedback system to report lapses, incorrect
advice/actions and inappropriate conduct by government officers is imperative as a corrective mechanism. Most departments
have a feedback system, but their effectiveness differs a lot. (Generally. the more vulnerable and less privileged the average
client is, the overall experience including the feedback system is at a lesser standard. eg: Centrelink has a fairly good feedback
system while DIBP send the complaints back to the same regional office back to the hands of APS3 level officers who -
according to the Audit Office - have had minimal training on important aspects of their work.) These systems should be
substantially improved with a goal to minimize ombudsman referrals. Government Integrity
4.5 Restore the public's trust in government by improving accountability and transparency within the public service. It is often the
case with many commonwealth and state government departments that customer service officers are not familiar with their line
of work, which in turn is an impediment to the efficient delivery of services. Lack of training may be one of the causes. Pure
incompetence may be another. In any case, this situation needs to be improved, not least because some of those who are
affected wouldn't even know they are! (ie. they are compelled to believe what they are told).
Any ideas on how this might be translated into an actionable and measurable commitment would be welcome. Government Integrity
4.6 Government Integrity
Parliamentary integrity in line with international better practice. Ensure that parliamentary integrity provisions are in line with
international better practice Justification: Members of Parliament are public officers and as such must put the public interest
ahead of all personal and other private interests. Unethical or corrupt behaviour is incompatible with their entrusted
responsibilities and undermines and detracts from their performance of their parliamentary duties and hence the performance of
their parliament.
Australia recognised this when it pledged to support the Harare Commonwealth Declaration 1991. The Declaration provided
(amongst other things) for Commonwealth countries:
“to work with renewed vigour, concentrating especially in the following areas:
· the protection and promotion of the fundamental political values of the Commonwealth;
· democracy, democratic processes and institutions which reflect national circumstances, the rule of law and the independence
of the judiciary, just and honest government.”
That pledge clearly indicates that the democratic system, of which Parliament is the peak institution, should function according to
the rule of law, justice and honesty.
More recently, international standards for parliaments were established by the Recommended Benchmarks for Legislatures,
adopted in 2006 by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the UNDP andthe World Bank. The recommendations
include:
10. Ethical Governance
10.1 Transparency and Integrity
10.1.1 Legislators should maintain high standards of accountability, transparency and responsibility in the conduct of all public
and parliamentary matters.
10.1.2 The Legislature shall approve and enforce a code of conduct, including rules on conflicts of interest and the acceptance of
gifts.
10.1.3 Legislatures shall require legislators to fully and publicly disclose their financial assets and business interests.
10.1.4 There shall be mechanisms to prevent, detect, and bring to justice legislators and staff engaged in corrupt practices.
Each House of Parliament should adopt its code of conduct independently as each is autonomous from the other House. Neither
House of the Parliament of Australia has adopted a code of conduct.Comparable parliaments, such as the UK House of
Commons at Westminster and the Canadian House of Commons, have well-established and highly developed integrity systems
including codes applying to their Houses and Members of Parliament.
However, codes of conduct and like instruments (e.g. code of ethics; conflcit of interest code) do vary widely in their provisions
and effectiveness. Accordingly, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association commissioned Recommended Benchmarks for
Codes of Conduct Applying to Members of Parliament, published in 2015. These recommendations specify the principles that
should be incorporated in a code of conduct and complementary provisions, having regard to local circumstances e.g. the size
Government openness - efficiency and effectiveness Lack of openness means that those parts of the public that must comply
Government Integrity
with government direction do not have a full understanding of what they are supposed to do or why they are doing it. Lack of
compliance leads to enforcement actions that are expensive.Some of these would be unnecessary if the government told people
what they needed to know.
Lack of openness leads to sloppy and incompetent decision making within government because undisclosed processes are not
open to question and therefore not open to correction.This disconnects the government from the population.It also starts to erode
the government's wisdom as this disconnection limits learning.Eventually, the government is sufficiently disconnected from
reality to be unable to governproperly because lack of openness includes lack of effective feedback.Thus, without accurate
information on what is happening, poor decision making on the information available and inability to effectively harness the
people to act in a timely manner the government stops being able to respond to events in real time.This is rarely good for a
governments continued existence.It could be argued that openness is a method for staying in power.
4.7
4.7.1
Government Integrity
Very true. Some government departments, however, do not usually need to respond to events in real time, but just provide
services and make decisions on a "one to one" basis. Openness to them, is about having to be accountable. By keeping their
processes undisclosed (and quite often undefined!) and their clients in the dark, they do not have to operate to the same level of
accountability, which means lesser costs (untrained/ improperly trained staff, outdated systems, no feedback mechanisms) to
them but higher economic and emotional costs to the community. Also note that there is at least one commonwealth department
whose clients are predominantly non-citizens who do not have a say in the democratic process! My point is, it is not always in the
government's interest to be open, which is why active campaigning is always necessary.4.8
4.9
4.9.1
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.12.2
Network Democracy (http://www.wisdom.to/networkdemocracy ): restoring the balance with real-time, comprehensive citizen
participation across government, democracy and industry / part of Australian Wisdom ( www.wisdom.to/australia)
Network Democracy ( http://www.wisdom.to/networkdemocracy ) is a sub-set of Australian Wisdom. Please see Australian
Wisdom submission on 'Public Participation' theme page and http://www.wisdom.to/australia .
Government Integrity
One network could provide comprehensive citizen participation, governance, transparency, wisdom and access to government
and industry. Stage 1 would deliver Government Wisdom with a specific focuson collective governance. Stage 2 could deliver
broader citizen participation. Stage 3 could deliver build on collective government wisdom and include the democratic process.
Additional stages could include industry/sector governance and other aspects of society.
The article explores 4 opportunities for real-time, comprehensive citizen participation in society:
- Government Wisdom: government reduced to “things” in the Internet of Everything. It provides a more efficient and effective
means to organise government. It also facilitates transparency and accessibility to every “thing”.
- Citizen participation (or Wisdom): Government Wisdom provides the means for “active participation of the people, as citizens, in
politics and civic life. Citizens and the community have access to every “thing” in real-time. The initial focus could be governance,
decision-making and financial financial “things” across government departments and agencies;
- Democracy Wisdom: real-time distributed community participation, contribution and governance across the process of
democracy
- Governance wisdom (industry): this provides the means of distributed community participation, contribution and governance
across industry participants. Community review could ensure communityinterests are also considered.
Government Wisdom is a subset of Network Society. presents an opportunity to achieve a rapid increase in productivity,
accessibility, transparency, accountability (including reducing corruption) and citizenparticipation in Society. The focus within this
article is government governance, decision-making and collaboration.
Government Wisdom comes “Over the Top” and links to governance “things” within the Internet of Everything (IoE) across
government departments and agencies. It acts as an aggregator of information, but also reveals knowledge and coordinates
action toward outcomes. All “things” that embody government can be defined in a single page. Everyone, anywhere can access
every “thing” within government.
Every aspect of government can be reduced to things and books. Things across can be combined into books in an exponential
number of ways for multiple purposes. Things can be combined in dynamic ways in unlimited combination. You can see how
things are connected. This means that knowledge and outcomes can be achieved by simply creating, viewing or things on
mobile devices.
The government is reduced to things and books which can be shared with other bureaucrats and citizens. With every thing
accessible to everyone everywhere, there is a profound impact upon productivity, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency,
Ensure that parliamentary openness procedures are in line with international good practice. This suggestions builds on Henare's Government Integrity
intial suggestion of "Endorse the Declaration on Parliamentary Openness.'
Parliaments must constantly renew their commitments to transparency and citizen engagement. Due to the rapid pace
technological change, there’s a need clear for periodic reviews of policies that influence parliament’s ability to engage; and it is
often helpful to institutionalize this process for periodic review. The Declaration on Parliamentary Openness states that
“Parliamentary transparency policies shall be publicly available and shall specify terms for their periodic review to take
advantage of technological innovations and evolving good practices.” As early as 2004, the conclusions of a 2004
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and World Bank Institute study group on access to information noted that
“[c]onsideration should be given to regular parliamentary review, for example on a biannual basis, of implementation of the
access to information regime.” (Mendel, 2005). The Global Centre for ICT in Parliament (2010) has also established that
parliaments should elaborate “strategic plans, updated regularly, for the use of ICT that directly improve the operational capacity
of parliaments to fulfil their legislative, oversight, and representational responsibilities.”
Recommendation - Institutionalize a regular legislative openness review, in the rules of procedure or in other procedures and
practices that involve the participation of local civil society experts, leading to both changes in policies and potential
commitments.Actively engage with the government in the development of parliamentary openness commitments in future OGP
action plans; either fully integrated intothe countries action plan or as a separate appendix, focused solely on the
legislature.Conduct a parliamentary information audit to ensure that necessary information is made available in accordance with
international good practice.Form or formally task a committee or other body within parliament to monitor parliamentary openness
and citizen engagement efforts.Engage in international fora dedicated to sharing international good practice, including the OGP
Legislative Openness Working Group, to actively learn from other peer institutions regarding emerging best practice on
parliamentary openness.suggested and open for further discussion at https://forum.opengovernment.org.au/t/open-
parliament/18/3
The Australian Parliament has already done or in the process of doing much of this, according to the Clerk of the Senate, who
Government Integrity
has advised that the:
"Australian Parliament does have an ICT Strategic Plan and we are developing a broad strategic objective list that would take
these matters into account."
I am advised that "legal advice not obtained for purposes associated with litigation is not protected by legal professional
Government Integrity
privilege.For all except those authorities which are subject to FOI laws, such advice is covered by the ordinary rules which
protect privacy.Authorities which are obliged to obey FOI laws will or will not be required to disclose the advice depending on the
application to it of FOI principles."
However, if the legal advice is related to a litigation, it is a well established principle that that is protected from disclosure. That
protects the interests of both the person launching the litgation and the person or organisation defending it. However, note (from
guidance on similar English law):
"The test for disclosure where public interest immunity is claimed The CPIA1996 s.21(1) abolished the old common law rules in
relation to the prosecution duty of disclosure and put in its place a new statutory framework. S. 3(6) (in relation to initial
disclosure) and s.7A(8) (in relation to the prosecutor’s continuing duty) state that “material must not be disclosed...to the
extentthat the court, on an application by the prosecutor, concludes it is not in the public interest to disclose it and orders
accordingly.”
The main categories of sensitive material:
*National security/Affairs and interests of state
*Journalists’ sources
*The prevention, detection & investigation of crime
*Material relating to children or young children
These are just the most commonly occurring examples and thus this list should not be regarded as exhaustive. It is also
important to remember that each case turns on its own facts and even cases involving the same type of documents may result in
different disclosure decisions."
Thus in the case involving the ACT Government, whether the advice received by Government can be disclosed seems to very
much depend on the nature of the case. Is the proposal for a simplified means of reviewing
refusals based on legal advice? If so, please clarify.
Perhaps there is a general issue here of the privilege attaching to legal advice (at least when given to Government). It is not my Government Integrity
expertise but I'll ask around.
Provisions of reasons for decisions and easy reviews to rebut these and access to legal advice on the basis for decisions. Often Government Integrity
decisions are made within Government that have profound affects on their citizens.The Government gets tax payer funded legal
advice to limit the rights of their own citizens and then refuses to provide the reasons for their actions, except that it is confirmed
by "legal advice".One example relates to the classification of foster carers as not workers or volunteers for the purposes of work
health and safety.While the Government in the ACT stated that this was the case "based on legal advice", carers were unable to
get access to this advice and question it. The regulator also used the "on legal advice" defence, which leaves citizens with little
to base their objections to policy on.
Government Integrity
I am advised that "legal advice not obtained for purposes associated with litigation is not protected by legal professional
privilege. For all except those authorities which are subject to FOI laws, such advice is covered by the ordinary rules which
protect privacy. Authorities which are obliged to obey FOI laws will or will not be required to disclose the advice depending on the
application to it of FOI principles."
However, if the legal advice is related to a litigation, it is a well established principle that that is protected from disclosure. That
protects the interests of both the person launching the litgation and the person or organisation defending it. However, note (from
guidance on similar English law):
"The test for disclosure where public interest immunity is claimed
The CPIA 1996 s.21(1) abolished the old common law rules in relation to the prosecution duty of disclosure and put in its place a
new statutory framework. S. 3(6) (in relation to initial disclosure) and s.7A(8) (in relation to the prosecutor’s continuing duty) state
that “material must not be disclosed...to the extent that the court, on an application by the prosecutor, concludes it is not in the
public interest to disclose it and orders accordingly.”
The main categories of sensitive material:
*National security/Affairs and interests of state
*Journalists’ sources
*The prevention, detection & investigation of crime
*Material relating to children or young children
These are just the most commonly occurring examples and thus this list should not be regarded as exhaustive. It is also
important to remember that each case turns on its own facts and even cases involving the same type of documents may result in
different disclosure decisions."
Thus in the case involving the ACT Government, whether the advice received by Government can be disclosed seems to very
much depend on the nature of the case. Is the proposal for a simplified means of reviewing refusals based on legal advice? If so,
please clarify.4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
Private Sector Whistleblower Legislation. Deliver legislation to protect whistleblowers exposing fraud, corruption, tax evasion
and tax avoidance in the privatesector, to match legislation to protect whistleblowers in the public sector. The protection of
whistleblowers is specifically in the Open Government Declaration under "Implement the highest standards of professional
integrity throughout our administrations".
Government Integrity
Research by the Australian Institute of Criminology (Australian Institute of Criminology, Fraud Against the Commonwealth 2010-
2013, Canberra, July 2015) found that over the 3 years between 2010 and 2013, there were at least 265,866 incidents of
suspected fraud reported by Commonwealth entities.
- Each year, substantially greater numbers of external fraud incidents were detected than suspected internal fraud incidents.
- Fraud involving financial benefits was the most frequently reported category of external fraud.
- Over the 3 years, the number of fraud-related corruption increased substantially from 37 incidents in 2010-2011 to 163 in 2012-
2013.
- While the cost of this fraud is hard to quantify and figures may vary, a conservative estimate is approximately $530m over 3
years, with increases from $119m in 2010-2011 to $204m in 2011-2012 to $207m in 2012-2013.
- Over the 3 years, external fraud accounted for $521m while internal fraud amounted to $9.1m or 1.7% of the total reported
fraud losses.
In relation to external fraud:
- risks arise in connection with the provision of new benefits, the introduction of new taxes, procurement practices, government-
funded programs and the use of consultants; and
- the relationship between corruption and collusion between external actors and those public servants working within
government.
The legislation to protect private sector whistleblowers should be based on the recommendations of the Senate Economics
Committee report ‘The performance of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission’.
The Senate Economics Committee report on ASIC recommended (Recommendation 15):...protections for corporate
whistleblowers be updated so that they are general consistent with and complement the protections afforded to public sector
whistleblowers under the Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013. Specifically, the corporate whistleblower framework should be
updated so that:
•Anonymous disclosures are protected;
•The requirement that a whistleblower must be acting in ‘good faith’ in disclosing information is removed, and replaced with a
requirement that a disclosure:
oIs based on an honest belief, on reasonable grounds, that the information disclosed shows or tends to show wrongdoing; or
oShows or tends to show wrongdoing, on an objective test, regardless of what the whistleblower believes;
Establish a federal ICAC Actionable 1: Form a working group that would consult with the public,community groups and legal,
Government Integrity
government and business organisations on the establishment of an Independent Federal Corruption Commission with proper
powers (to be decided) to take and act on complaints of corruption within government. The body would also take a role in
advising on anti-corruption measures and guidelines for the public service and parliament.
The implementation of the Register of Lobbyists was a good beginning in increasing transparency however there is much room Government Integrity
for improvement.Forexample currently there is a requirement for Lobbyists to list owners. Many of the Lobbying companies list
as owners various anonymous entities, for example, as holding companies, consolidated funds, investment funds or trusts.
Without knowing the beneficiaries of these anonymous entities, there is no real transparencyaround potential conflict of
interests.See random sample below (list of owners to be found at the bottom of each entry on the Register):
Statecraft: http://lobbyists.pmc.gov.au/register/view_agency.cfm?id=66
Barton Deakin: http://lobbyists.pmc.gov.au/register/view_agency.cfm?id=338
Burson-Marsteller Pty Ltd: http://lobbyists.pmc.gov.au/register/view_agency.cfm?id=88
Hawker-Britton: http://lobbyists.pmc.gov.au/register/view_agency.cfm?id=96
CGP Solutions Ltd: http://lobbyists.pmc.gov.au/register/view_agency.cfm?id=265
Actionable 1:To ensure the published list of owners is full and complete naming all the beneficiaries.Where there are extensive
and complex financial networks (and/or where there are shareholders over a certain number), the exact relationship to the
lobbying entity and any subsidiaries should be listed. Smaller family trusts and other business entities should stipulate all
beneficiaries.
Actionable 2:End the scoping study for the sale of the ASIC Register. Make Register free and easy to access.This would make it
easier to ascertain ownership and beneficiaries of business entities. ASIC entries should include all beneficiaries not only the
name of the administering accountant. This would not only assist in improving transparency around lobbying but also around
corporate arrangements in general.
Actionable 3: Institute a ban on former politicians, especially Ministers taking up positions in lobbying organisations, corporations
orin associations involved in lobbying activities on behalf of members.This is particularly relevant where a Minister with former
portfolio responsibilities might enter into a business relationship post- politics that directly relates to their former role; and would
be perceived as conflict of interest whilst in the performance of parliamentary duties.In other words remove the ’revolving door’
between government and business interests. A working group might determine a reasonable period of time to elapse, if any,
before being able to take up such a role post politics.
Actionable 4:Design a plan to reform political donations.The best option would be to ban donations altogether to remove any
conflict of interest and interference in the democratic process. A working group formed to establish a system of taxpayer funded
revenue being used for limited campaigning such as for brochures (letterboxing), shared time for candidates on ABC television
and radio to outline their policies. The Americanisation of political campaigning that requires large sums of money to travel and
spruik does not contribute to the democratic process. Essentially all that voters require is a comprehensive understanding of
policies each candidate/party brings to the electorate so that each can make an informed choice without the distraction of
spin.Ideally, get rid of the travelling campaign buses which are distractions from real intentions.Stick with policy outlines that are
easy to understand including funding.This would also make any taxpayer funded contributions to candidates affordable and
Establish a federal ICAC To build greater confidence and legitimacy in the parliament and ensure that issues of potentially
Government Integrity
corrupt behaviour are
addressed via an independent mechanism, rather than directly by parliamentary peers or departments under the instruction of a
federal minister, establish a federal equivalent Ro the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption empowered to
investigate potentially corrupt behaviour by politicians, their advisors and senior public servants.
This step would raise the transparency and build trust in government and help counter Australia's slide on international anti-
corruption measures. The specific scope of investigation powers should be determined through the involvement of a citizen's
panel and be a transparent process such that Australian citizens can have confidence that the mechanism will meet its goals of
providing an independent review of potentially corrupt or inappropriate conduct that is currently self-investigated by parliament
and agencies.
4.17
4.18
Given that Australia's Special Minister of State, who is currently responsible for investigating such matters, recently stepped
down due to a police investigation into his own conduct, and recent public concern and scrutiny over conduct by other
parliamentarians, the creation of this mechanism would go a long way towards restoring confidence in the Australian parliament
and support the OGP' anti-corruption goals.
Government Integrity
The options are clear and well-known, especially in NSW where the State regulation of donations and expenditure is well-
developed. Further reforms and international comparisons are outlined in the excellent report: "Political Donations. Final report of
Panel of Experts" by Schott, K., A. Tink, and J. Watkins, 2014. Premier Baird has accepted the recommendation that he
advocate a similar Australia-wide scheme. That would be a great starting point.
Improve transparency around political donations. To improve transparency around political donations, pass legislation that
Government Integrity
establishes a single independent entity that administers all political donations; managing collection, distribution to the nominated
party or individual candidate and public reporting. This should be achieved through a digital system that collects, distributes and
reportsseamlessly - making the details of the legal entities making the donation public along with the donation amounts at the
time the donationis made, and detailing any subsequent actions (such as where a party or candidate rejects the donation due to
conflicts of interest, links to crime or other reasons). Political parties should be legally forbidden from receiving donations from
outside this mechanism, and individuals, groups and organisations should be forbidden from offering donations outside this
mechanism. The system should be audited annually and be
paid for by taking a small percentage of donations made (2-3%). The system should have front-end tools for individuals, political
parties and organisations to embed donation taking systems into their own sites,so that from a donater's perspective it functions
identically to makinga donation directly to a political party or organisation.
This approach would allow real-time reporting of total donations by candidate, party and overall - where they are coming from
and build a history of where specific donors have made donations to the same party and candidates.
Unless there is a compelling reason to support anonymous donations, all donations of any amount should be tracked through
this system, with randomised verification and checking methods to minimise the ability of donors to conceal the entity making the
donation.
In the future it would be possible to extend this system to state and local elections as a central system for managing and
reporting all political donations across Australia, reducing the capacity of organisations and wealthy individuals to inappropriately
influence MPs or parties and creating true transparency across the entire system. If possible the system should be designed as
an open source solution and the code made available for scrutiny.
4.19
Endorse the Declaration on Parliamentary Openness.
Government Integrity4.20
All Commonwealth, state and territory parliamentary and local council proceedings should be made available via live web
Government Integrity
streaming with accessible closed captions, using open standards rather than requiring proprietary plugins. These streams should
be accessible permanently and released under a creative commons licence that allow them to be embedded on other websites.
Hansard transcripts of parliamentary, committee and council proceedings should be made available within a reasonable
timeframe not less than two weeks. They should be accessible via API, searchable by speaker (including committee witnesses),
and published in well-formed HTML (not just PDF). These transcripts should also be released under an appropriate accessible
licence.
Official witnesses that appear in camera should be identified in these records, even if the content of the discussions is not.
Parliamentary departments and councils should report quarterly on the percentage of proceedings that were made available via
accessible formats, and the average and longest time for initial proof transcripts to be released.
4.21
Australian Government's commitment to the UK PM's Anti-Corruption Summit in May 2016.Transparency International Australia Government Integrity
is fully supportive of the leading role played by TI UK in working closely with the UK Prime Minister's office to develop a sound
and achievable agenda for the upcoming Anti-Corruption Summit in London in May 2016. Transparency International's priorities
for the summit are listed below. We strongly urge the Australian Government, in the spirit of Open Government, to not only make
public commitments to the final priorities at the Summit, but to also take a leading role in establishing open data as a core
component of those commitments made by world leaders gathered at that time. We also encourage the Australian Government
to develop and ongoing follow-up plan out of the UK Summit that forms a part of the OGP National Action Plan on the topic of
anti-corruption.
TRANSPARENCY INTERNATIONAL PRIORITIES FOR THE LONDON ANTI-CORRUPTION SUMMIT
Corruption has a corrosive impact on prosperity, growth, security, and the fight against extreme poverty. Transparency
International believes the London Anti-Corruption Summit provides a unique opportunity for global leaders to signal intent at the
highest level for tackling corruption head-on through concrete, ambitious commitments that can be implemented over the next
five years. Global leaders must form a united front in the face of corruption and take action so that:
- Corrupt groups and individuals are not able to act with impunity and get away with their crimes.
- Businesses receive no benefit from taking part in dodgy deals and operating in the darkness.
- The people who are hurt most by corruption receive justice.
The London Anti-Corruption Summit should generate time-bound commitments that will:
1. Prevent corruption: Make it harder to hide and transfer and benefit from the proceeds of corruption by championing full
beneficial ownership information transparency.
2. End Impunity: Improve the way law enforcement agencies in key countries and between banks, business, civil society share
and act on intelligence, related to risk and suspicions of corruption.
3. Empower and support citizens to seek justice: Promote accountability and citizen engagement on corruption, and protect
activists to do their work.
The Summit should also ensure that the tools and mechanisms are in place to ensure effective implementation and monitoring of
the commitments over a 3-5 year period.
Finally, whilst the UK’s leadership in convening the Summit is welcome, it remains crucial that the UK gets its own house in
order. This is most evident in the need for the Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies to adhere to the same standards in
the UK with regards to beneficial ownership transparency. They must be required to publish time-bound plans of action for
adopting public beneficial ownership registries.
4.22
4.23
Integrity of Resource Management. Lead Agency: Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
Government Integrity
Outline
The more effective management of public resources is increasingly recognised as requiring high standards of integrity by public
officers. These ethical standards depend on an integrity system led and practiced from the highest level of the public sector and
followed at every level. The integrity system depends on both structure and culture, and the interaction between them, for its
effectiveness.
Effective integrity systems have been shown to expose unethical, improper and illegal activities that were otherwise undetected
despite their damaging impacts on the efficient and effective use of public resources (e.g. reports by NSW ICAC, Qld CCC, Vic
IBAC). Effective integrity systems reduce the risk of ineffective management of public resources.
The integrity system must operate across all arms of the system of government and recognise that Members of Parliament are
public officers who, as such, must put the public interest ahead of all personal and other private interests. Unethical, improper or
corrupt behaviour is incompatible with their entrusted responsibilities and undermines and detracts from their performance of the
parliament and hence the effective management of public resources.
Australia recognised this when it pledged to support the Harare Commonwealth Declaration 1991. The Declaration provided
(amongst other things) for Commonwealth countries:
“to work with renewed vigour, concentrating especially in the following areas:
• the protection and promotion of the fundamental political values of the Commonwealth;
• democracy, democratic processes and institutions which reflect national circumstances, the rule of law and the independence
of the judiciary, just and honest government.”
That pledge clearly indicates that the democratic system, of which Parliament is the peak institution, should function according to
the rule of law, justice and honesty.
More recently, international standards for parliaments were established by the Recommended Benchmarks for Legislatures,
adopted in 2006 by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the UNDP and the World Bank. The recommendations
include:
10. Ethical Governance
10.1 Transparency and Integrity
10.1.1 Legislators should maintain high standards of accountability, transparency and responsibility in the conduct of all public
and parliamentary matters.
10.1.2 The Legislature shall approve and enforce a code of conduct, including rules on conflicts of interest and the acceptance of
gifts.
10.1.3 Legislatures shall require legislators to fully and publicly disclose their financial assets and business interests.
10.1.4 There shall be mechanisms to prevent, detect, and bring to justice legislators and staff engaged in corrupt practices.
The Municipal Association of Victoria (MAV), the umbrella body for Victoria’s 79 local Councils, is proposing that the Federal
Government Integrity
Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development could deliver more focussed and responsive regional development
programs and services by increasing transparency and public participation. This would occur by establishing an online register of
Community Plans on a regional basis across Australia. In Victoria there are now in excess of 700 Community Plans, which are
documents produced as a result of community-driven processes to identify community priorities in rank order (with number 1
being the most important). These community plans are owned and developed by the community, with the local Council playing a
supporting role. In most cases community members have voted to determine the highest priority projects. Community Plans are
produced in every State and Territory across Australia but in most cases they are not utilised in the development of regional
plans by State and Federal Governments, who produce regional development plans and strategies that are often not addressing
the priority needs of local communities.
By way of example, the Golden Plains Shire Council has about 20 Community Plans documented on their web site at
https://www.goldenplains.vic.gov.au/page.aspx?u=345
Golden Plains Council has a population of some 18,000 people and some 4,000 are involved in the community planning
process. It was only via the community planning process that the Council identified, by examining the common priorities across a
large number of community plans, that there were very significant deficiencies in post- hospital specialist health care in the area.
This has triggered a revolution in health services in the region in the last 5-10 years, supported by State and Federal
Governments.
4.23.1
Proposed by Municipal Association of Victoria (MAV) via John Hennessy
The suggested Community Plan register would group and summarise community plans by region and would be updated
whenever the community plans are updated (usually every 1-3 years). This information is currently not aggregated except by
individual Councils, and so is usually not utilised by State and Federal Governments in developing policies or strategies for
regional development. The ability to be able to identify local and regional community priorities from a single source has the
potential to transform regional service delivery so it is more responsive to local priorities rather than adopting the usual cookie
cutter’ approach of programs being developed by bureaucrats on a ‘one glove fits all’ basis. Policy and program developers
would be able to rapidly assess where the gaps are in service delivery: for example, are roads or health or learning or broadband
solutions most needed by local communities? If the Federal (and State) Government is to become more agile, efficient and
effective, it needs to ensure its resources (programs and services) are more focussed on addressing priority local community
needs. In the past decade there has been a massive amount of waste and duplication with Federal and State Governments
producing a range of regional development plans, most of which have sat on the shelf with very little, if any, action. The National
Online Community Plan Register would be the first step to more community-driven public services.
In Western Australia there is legislative requirements for all local governments (approx 140) to have Strategic Community Plans Government Integrity
in place (reviewed every 4 years) These Plans are developed through a process of community and stakeholder engagement and
outline community aspirations/priorities for each local government area. The Corporate/Business Plans for each local
government then outline how they will respond and contribute to these community priorities and may include the role played -
e.g. Provider, Partner, Funder, Regulator, Monitor, Facilitator, Advocate. Local governments have a wealth of information about
their local communities, if there was a process to aggregate all this local knowledge up into one location/data set it would provide
a great learning opportunity for Federal government initiatives - so rather than go out to engage again with the community - it
may be that the the knowledge already exists - gathered through existing engagement processes. The challenge is how to
collate this information.4.24
4.25
Four people attended this event: Kat, Tim, Ken and I. The discussion focused on the Grand Challenges and event on the 11th
Government Integrity
April. I was asked about the involvement of agencies in this process, I referred to the IDC list and participation in the upcoming
event. We discussed agencies who might become lead agencies if these actions were taken up, and the differences between
parliamentary integrity and executive integrity. I reminded everyone that while a commitment template could be developed at the
11th April event around other Grand Challenges and that they would be considered by Government now and in the future
(between NAP's), they would be unlikely to be included in this NAP. I encouraged participants to consider how actions might be
delivered as part of the other two Grand Challenges selected by Government. A follow up teleconference will be scheduled for
next week, in the lead up to the 11th April event.
Actionable 1: Form a working group that would consult with the public, community groups and legal, government and business
Government Integrity
organisations on the establishment of an Independent Federal Corruption Commission with proper powers (to be decided) to
take and act on complaints of corruption within government. The body would also take a role in advising on anti-corruption
measures and guidelines for the public service and parliament.4.3
2016-2020 focused on alcohol-related cognitive impairment and dementia and alcohol-related suicide in the Australian midlife
women cohort, 35 to 59 years of age.
Government Integrity
Research portfolio with the NHMRC, ARC and PHCRIS
http://www.phcris.org.au/roar/profiles/index.php?id=11044 OGP Commitment activity suggestion
Need: Keeping and building on ‘corporate memory’
Activity to meet this need
Formal requirement for government staff, five years from retirement, to mentor younger employees for 12 months. Agreement of
the organisation, retiring employee and the younger employee that ‘shadowing’ is an important work task of both employees and
a formal part of their professional development. The basic process is below and this is expected to evolve through individual and
organisation involvement and need.
1. 'Shadow' a senior government employee (who has more than 15 years of government work experience) with the senior
employee purposefully showing and explaining their most valuable work tools and likely barriers;
2. Attend structured meetings to learn from the senior employees long-term lived experience of developing positive work
relationships, dealing with intricate organisational knowledge, managing transitions and agile change.
How it works
The mentoring program has rules and requirements similar to staff training but the content is the lived experience of the senior
staff member's work history. Particularly the technological, social, political, work/home balance and economic capital useful in
enabling more efficient organisation policies, plans and processes. This activity also refines career path planning and
professional development decisions. I strongly suggest that more places for females and minority groups be allocated to this
program to increase government staff diversity.
The benefit to the senior mentor includes reflecting upon new insights, perspectives, information offered by the younger person.
Noting when their work and life experiences are of benefit and can improve current and planned projects. Also, as the senior
employee retires, the organisation may decide to contract the retired person to ‘soft mentor’ senior executives.
Monitor and evaluate
Such employee interaction needs to be a work duty with details of how selection of mentor/mentee occurs, how work is planned
with privacy/confidentiality clauses, the means to review progress and ways to stop the interaction when required. Reporting on
the process is required at 3 month intervals. A common report is prepared as well as individual reports. Work completed during
these interactions will carry both people's names for transparent recognition and appraisal. An employee who has observed the
interactions is also required to evaluate the benefits, challenges and problems at 6 and 12 months.
4.4
The action is to introduce a representation performance reporting system for Members of Parliament, which includes release of
an annual report on the way in which each member represents their electorate. measured against their own commitments
documented in a publicly available "Statement of Approach” prior to election.
The system would work as follows:
Each election candidate would lodge a “Statement of Approach” with the Electoral Commission prior to the election.
The Statements of Approach would set out how that candidate proposes to represent the electorate - both in terms of regular
communication and the extent to which they commit to using participatory and deliberative processes for decision making.
The Statements of Approach would be formatted in a common format (decided by the Electoral Commission using a sound
public consultation method), to improve comparability, and available on-line as well as in public libraries, Council offices etc.The
purpose of the standard template would be to improve voters ability to compare candidates.An annual assessment of each
Member and Senator, against their own commitments in their own statement, would be made each year and reported publicly.
Initially the assessment could be made by the Departments of the Senate and House,
This would sit alongside with their annual disclosures of donations and convicts of interest - and be easily publicly accessible.
The assessment method would be developed by a participatory process such as a randomly selected Citizen's Jury or Civic
Council.
Civil society organisations should be supported to play a role in ensuring widespread public input into development of the
template, the assessment process and, potentially, the assessments themselves.
The system should be developed in year one. In year two sitting parliamentarians could be required to complete the template
and be assessed in year 2 and annually until the following election, at which time the full system (involving candidates) would be
put in place.
This Action will improve the way Australia delivers public services and manages public resources because it will improve the
accountability between elected representatives and the people they represent. Itwill increase Australia’s performance against all
three OGP Principles: Accountability, Transparency and Public Participation
4.5
introduce a representation performance reporting system for Members of Parliament, which includes release of an annual report Government integrity
on the way in which each member represents their electorate. measured against their own commitments documented in a
publicly available "Statement of Approach” prior to election.
The system would work as follows:
Each election candidate would lodge a “Statement of Approach” with the Electoral Commission prior to the election.
The Statements of Approach would set out how that candidate proposes to represent the electorate - both in terms of regular
communication and the extent to which they commit to using participatory and deliberative processes for decision making.
The Statements of Approach would be formatted in a common format (decided by the Electoral Commission using a sound
public consultation method), to improve comparability, and available on-line as well as in public libraries, Council offices etc.The
purpose of the standard template would be to improve voters ability to compare candidates.An annual assessment of each
Member and Senator, against their own commitments in their own statement, would be made each year and reported publicly.
Initially the assessment could be made by the Departments of the Senate and House,
This would sit alongside with their annual disclosures of donations and convicts of interest - and be easily publicly accessible.
The assessment method would be developed by a participatory process such as a randomly selected Citizen's Jury or Civic
Council.
Civil society organisations should be supported to play a role in ensuring widespread public input into development of the
template, the assessment process and, potentially, the assessments themselves.
The system should be developed in year one. In year two sitting parliamentarians could be required to complete the template
and be assessed in year 2 and annually until the following election, at which time the full system (involving candidates) would be
put in place.
This Action will improve the way Australia delivers public services and mangoes public resources because it will improve the
accountability between elected representatives and the people they represent. Itwill increase Australia’s performance against all
three OGP Principles: Accountability, Transparency and Public Participation
Government integrity
B. Issues included in the ART Revision of 29/01/2016 Draft of Background Material (included at -
http://ogpau.wikispaces.com/Background+of+open+government+in+Australia ) as requiring inclusion and attention in our first
National Action Plan (references to supporting information and details is provided with each issue raised).
1. Parliament. Establishing a Parliamentary Integrity System which includes:
(a) development of codes of conduct for members of the House of Representatives and the Senate consistent with the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association’s Benchmarks (para 1.4.1 (c);
(b)a Parliamentary Integrity Commissioner (para 1.5.1);
(c) an independent system to review claims of public interest immunity by the Executive in response to requests by Parliamentfor
the production of documents (para 1.5.2)5.1
5.2
http://opendata-aha.net/you-can-contribute-to-the-open-government-national-action-plan/
This is welcome news, and appreciate the thought that has gone into design of consultative steps so far.
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
Two comments.
One, you state
“At this stage, it is envisioned that the first Australian Government’s NAP will focus on the two OGP grand challenges of:
• Improving Public Services – measures that address the full spectrum of citizen services including health, education, criminal
justice, water, electricity, telecommunications, and any other relevant service areas by fostering public service improvement or
private sector innovation; and
• More Effectively Managing Public Resources – measures that address budgets, procurement, natural resources, and foreign
assistance.”
Many outside government might ponder the ‘envisioning’ without outside input that led to this choice of these two challenges
from the five laid out by the OGP, leaving this challenge off the agenda:
“. Increasing Public Integrity—measures that address corruption and public ethics, access to information, campaign finance
reform, and media and civil society freedom.”
Two, experience elsewhere suggests an advisory body or stakeholder group can enhance the partnership concept and add
value. There is no mention of such a body in the published material. NZ, well into the process is just one of many countries that
have now gone down this path.
http://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PA1508/S00042/advisory-group-for-open-government-partnership-appointed.htm
Looking forward to taking things forward.
5.2.1
5.3
The omission of a majority of the five Grand Challenges seems incompatible with the very purpose of OGP, all the more-so when Engagement for OGP
those selected do not include:
Increasing Public Integrity—measures that address corruption and public ethics, access to information, campaign finance reform,
and media and civil society freedom.
Australia's slide down the TI Corruption Perception Index reflects the increasing evidence of improper, unethical and illegal
actions amongst both public officers (including a few MPs) and those who they regulate. We must arrest that slide with its risks to
Australia's governance, reputation and economy.
Engagement for OGP
m writing on behalf of the Steering Committee of the Australian Open Government Partnership Network (AOGPN).
The AOGPN was established in December 2015 as a coalition of individuals and organisations for the purpose of engaging with
government in the development of Australia’s Open Government Partnership (OGP) National Action Plan and participating in
efforts to enhance and improve democratic practices in Australia and the Asia-Pacific region.
The network will provide a forum for the exchange of information and ideas on areas for reform, seek to ensure the action plan is
developed in the true spirit of partnership, and work to assist government in the determination of priorities for consideration.
Current Steering Committee members are:
Dr David Solomon (Accountability Roundtable), Chair
Dr Nicholas Gruen (Open Knowlege Australia)
Jon Lawrence (Electronic Frontiers Australia)
Dr Johan Lidberg (School of Media, Arts and Journalism, Monash University)
Phil Newman (Transparency International Australia)
Kat Szuminska (OpenAustralia Foundation)
Craig Thomler (Gov 2.0 Advocate)
Peter Timmins, Convener
A number of other organisations and individuals have joined or are in the process of doing so.
At the invitation of the OGP Support Unit, Kat Szuminska attended the Civil Society Leaders Workshop in The Hague from 21-23
January.
The Network has a webpage at www.aogpn.net and will shortly have a more comprehensive web presence, encouraging other
organisations and individuals to contribute to the second phase of the consultation now underway.
The following issues and concerns arise from what we have seen so far as the government moves ahead on this important
initiative.
5.4
5.4.1
5.5
Low key initiative
Given the importance of reform and the opportunity provided to improve how government operates including through citizen
I am encouraged that the Australian Government is progressing to membership of the OGP, particularly considering the
Engagement for OGP
foundational principle of engaging civil society in government decision-making. This is increasing being demonstrated in social
purpose programs where those the programs are intended to impact are engaged in the decisions on the design, delivery and
evaluation of those programs.
However, I am surprised that the current engagement for gaining membership does not embody that very principle. Informations
session in four major cities and limited consultation structures immediately disengages and potentailly loses the trust of many
sectors of civil society. It is those most disadvantaged that will be impacted most by this approach to ‘engagement’
For example, PM&C could prepare information suitable for connecting with Indigenous Australians and utilise extant AG, State
and Territory structures to engage.
Just a couple of comments, now that we’re getting to the point of doing things globally.
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
You’d appreciate that there’s a parallel org to the ogp – the civil society end of gov – so we’ll be able to give you some
comparative feedback on how you go about building the Action plan.au. http://www.ogphub.org/napreview-pilot/
Obviously one of the major products of these plans will developing is a “Citizen’s Engagement Platform” (built around a citizen’s
ID). So we can expect (with your imagination) that ad hoc/buckshot approaches like the gov 2.0 taskforce will start firming up into
a platform which may be used by gov, and civil society, groups around the world. http://open4m.org/about-us/
You’re very lucky to have many existing groups of correspondents in various countries already that span between the internal
groups of a government and the civil society groups with which they coordinate “actions”. e.g.
http://forum.opengovernment.org.uk/groups/ogp
One more note as you say “NZ and other governments have generally established their groups after getting the national action
plan developed”. That’s not what they are telling others. “New Zealand (as one) is in the process of setting up a Stakeholder
Advisory Group to assist with developing, implementing and evaluating their plans”. http://www.ogphub.org/blog/advancing-ogp-
in-asia-pacific/
Personally I prefer the way you’re going about it – keeping things open. As Shreya (your OGP contact in Singapore) says in the
doc above, “The important thing now is to sustain the positive momentum generated by OGP and create permanent dialogue
mechanisms, with clear terms of reference, representation drawn from groups that go beyond the ‘usual suspects’ and regular
meetings to strengthen the impact of the OGP process on government-civil society engagement and to mitigate against risks
posed by changes in leadership.”
“Citizen’s Engagement Platform” (as the English call it). “Permanent Dialogue Mechanism”, “Knowledge Exchange”; call it what
you want. That’s one deliverable which every gov wants delivered before the “action” really starts.
5.6 Establish a formal mechanism such as a high level inter agency or cross jurisdictional group to ensure co-ordinated
consideration of OGP, SDG and related strategic policy challenges across the Australian Government.The establishment of a
multi-stakeholder OGP Australia oversight group, comprising government, civil society and the private sector to ensure ongoing
commitment to fulfilling OGP obligations and to guide the ongoing OGP process, implementation, monitoring and reporting. Engagement for OGP
5.7 To foster effective engagement between government and non-government entities, thereby supporting more inclusive and open
governance, create a formal review and engagement mechanism for interaction with the government by civil societies to aid in
future OGP planning cycles and other policy formulation and decision-making processes. Engagement for OGP5.8
TIA congratulates the Australian Government and Prime Minister Turnbull for the recent decision to commit to finalizing
Australia’s membership of the OGP, and for the proactive approach it is taking to public consultation in the development of the
first Australian Government National Action Plan.
Engagement for OGP
The OGP requires broad consultation in the development of the NAP – from the public, civil society and the private sector. TIA’s
comments come from its perspective as the leading civil society organization promoting transparency, integrity and
accountability, and fighting corruption.
Introduction
Now that it has decided to commit to finalizing its membership of the OGP, the government is moving with commendable speed
to draft its first National Action Plan by May 2016, for government consideration in June 2016, and a launch in July 2016. This
speed does bring risks – that the first National Action Plan is essentially a ‘goodwill’ document, not ambitious enough and not
containing commitments of substance. The second risk is that to meet these tight timelines the consultation process will be
structured in a way which downplays the opportunity for real input from civil society and other non-government sectors. The
Government and its advisers may take the view that it is better to have a first NAP, however imperfect, and that the NAP process
and content will be much more satisfactory the second time around. TIA’s job, and that of civil society generally, is to participate
as fully as possible in the development of a first NAP which is ambitious in scope and commitment, and flags priority areas for
future NAPs. TIA is committed to membership of the Australian Open Government Partnership Network recently constituted
The remainder of this short paper flags some initial comments and areas of interest to TIA.
Increasing Public Integrity
5.9
The OGP – Australia website has already indicated that the first National Action Plan will focus on two of the OGP’s five ‘grand
challenges’: Improving Public Services, and More Effectively Managing Public Resources. This decision was made without public
consultation on whether other ‘grand challenges’ should have greater priority, especially Increasing Public Integrity (‘measures
that address corruption and public ethics, access to information, campaign finance reform, and media and civil society freedom’).
Successive Australian Governments have made considerable and sustained progress in improving public services and more
effectively managing public resources, whereas limited and patchy progress has been made in the areas of corruption and public
ethics, access to information, and campaign finance reform. In other words, there is much more to do in relation to increasing
public integrity. TIA recommends that the Government include Increasing Public Integrity as one of its initial ‘grand challenges’.
Engagement for OGP
Vision
There is not much in the way of a vision in the published material.
Perhaps we couldn’t do much better than draw on the Open Government Declaration thus:
“The Australian Government with input from its citizens is committed to improved democratic practices in line with the OGP Open
Government Declaration:
•“to promote transparency, fight corruption, empower citizens, and harness the power of new technologies to make government
more effective and accountable.”
•“to uphold the value of openness in our engagement with citizens to improve services, manage public resources, promote
innovation, and create safer communities”
•“to embrace principles of transparency and open government with a view toward achieving greater prosperity, well-being, and
human dignity in our own countries and in an increasingly interconnected world.”
Grand Challenges
It is disappointing that the published material in parts suggests important decisions about ‘grand challenges’ that may limit
commitments the government is prepared to consider have been made without any consultation.
For example these statements:
“through consultation, the aim is for the first Australian Government’s National Action Plan to include ambitious actions that
support the OGP grand challenges of improving public services and better managing public resources... Contributions for the
NAP will be considered in the context of what will improve public services and improve management of public resources, as well
as what will benefit the public, provide opportunities for business and support innovation in Australia.”
However another sentence brings transparency and accountability and public engagement into the picture:
“Australia’s membership of the OGP is an opportunity to improve public service delivery, increase the transparency and
accountability of government, and encourage greater public engagement. It also an opportunity for the public, civil society, and
the private sector to contribute ideas for how government can achieve those goals.”
Unilateral decisions about the scope of what will be considered would be an unfortunate start to a “partnership.”
5.10
5.11
5.12
5.13
Consultation should commence and proceed on the basis of OGP guidance that the plan in its final form should “consist of a set
Utilize the IAP2 (International Association for Public Participation) Core Values and Quality Assurance Standards for Community
and Stakeholder Engagement as the benchmark for public participation for government to incorporate into the way they involve
community in decision making processes
It is essential to have true collaboration between the government and the public. This is not achieved by the government
dictating what the grand challenges should be. The process that has been adopted in relation to this negates the whole purpose
of collaboration and exchange of views.
Endorse the Joint Declaration on Open Government for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda-the Sustainable Development
Goals- and reflect OGP goals and ambition in Australia's implementation plan.
Consult with current OGP member countries in the region (Indonesia, Republic of Korea, Mongolia, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, Philippines) to identify how and in what manner Australia can assist in deepening and extending the growth and
enhancement of open, transparent and accountable government in the Asia Pacific region; support and engage in regional and
bilateral initiatives that promote OGP goals and principles.
The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) providing a submission to the consultation. Below is a summary of PIAC's
recommendations relevant to engagement for OGP. (Please note, other recommendations regarding public participation are also
relevant, which are available in that Wiki theme).
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
- Australia’s consultation process in the development of the National Plan should maintain the spirit in which the OGP was
created and focus on genuine partnership and collaboration in order to facilitate improved governance.
5.14
- PIAC recommends that:
• a list of all stakeholders who have contributed to the consultation be made publicly available to demonstrate the breadth of
stakeholders who have participated; and
• further consultations should be advertised more widely, and engage with private companies, legal and human rights groups,
academics and Indigenous organisations. (Recommendation 1)
1. Establish a team with a mandate to broadly improve both public sector and broader public understanding of open government Engagement for OGP
and related issues.
Justification, public sector:: There is a significant knowledge and understanding gap when it comes to communicating with
agencies and local governments, and we need to see communication being one of the major focal points for any reform effort. At
the moment, there are a bundle of things we're trying to break through, from the inevitable 'but this will just mean more work and
cost us money' or 'but this is OUR agency's special project', to some agencies not having a good basic understanding of either
the technological aspects or what we're even trying to achieve.
Justification, broader public: There needs to be more attention given to communicating with the broader public about what we're
trying to achieve, how it's going, what's been delivered, and really showcasing work that has a broad public interest (frequently
maps / social sciences / citizen science) in the context of open knowledge. Things that aren't necessarily economically material,
but are important because they raise levels of public expectation and awareness, ensuring that engaging citizens with data
remains a priority for future governments.
2. Establish a local government (and potentially small-agency) support program to give hands-on assistance in scoping and
delivering meaningful projects.
5.15
Justification: small agencies and certainly local governments will need more than funding to deliver change – there’s a big need
for mentoring and practical assistance. This obviously going to be much harder than just providing funding, but these are very
small organisations and won't get past the stage of developing ideas and scoping a project without both the enthusiasm and
support of others working in the space. (This is not a role for consultants - the engagement has to come from within the public
service to begin with.)
Engagement for OGP
The non-profit sector in Australia takes responsibility for delivering hundreds of thousands of essential services as well as
managing public resources. The Australian Charities and Non-profit Commission has details of over 53000 organisations that are
required to categorise their activities and say whose benefit they are working for. The government use this to include them in
relevant policy and budgeting discussions. The Government could then create an ongoing dialogue mechanism with these
organisations. This could include a system that automatically invites them to participate in policy and budgeting reviews that
effect their areas of expertise and experience. There should also be a budget associated with facilitating participation for the
organisations, given that there are many small and resource-limited. Australia needs their frank and fearless advice.5.16
There is a large amount of data collected by various government departments on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
and organisations. It is therefore important to ensure that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander sector is engaged throughout
all stages of the project. There is often a level of caution among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and organisations
because of the way data has been used against us in the past. These sensitivities can not be overlooked.
Engagement for OGP
There is also conversations about who owns the data collected. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander orgs are required to report
their data and there is ongoing tensions about who owns that data. Specifically with the AIHW. Data ownership and Intellectual
Property needs to be considered from an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander point of view.
Working with the sector on National Action Plan is vital to consider and address their issues effectively.
5.16.1
5.16.2
5.17
5.17.1
5.18
5.19
Great to see this input. It would be good to know what kind of stakeholder engagement occurs between the AIHW & the sectors
it collects data from (and provides it to) and how that compares with the principles & themes of the Open Government
Partnership so we can frame up Commitments & actions which better reflect people's needs.
I agree completely and would like to ask if there has been any engagement with Australia's First People's to this point? Is the
National Congress of Australia's First Peoples engaged in the Consultation?
If the first National Action Plan does not address all Grand Challenges, that will leave Australia with incomplete fulfilment of its
OGP membership obligations and without commitments related to the remaining Grand Challenges which complement and
strengthen actions included in that first NAP.
Accordingly, it is proposed that this first NAP include a commitment to prepare the second NAP within which are to be included
commitments related to any Grand Challenges not addressed in this first NAP
I agree with Ken completely. His comment follows the teleconference yesterday and add an important additional point to the
summary of the conversation which Amelia posted earlier today. We recognise that it will be important that in addressing the 2
Grand Challenges proposed by Cabinet it will be impossible to ignore the need to increase public integrity if Public Service is to
improved and Public Resources are to be managed effectively. We also recognised the challenge of engaging the private sector
is integral to the challenge to ensure effective management of Public Resource as Governments increasingly partner with the
Private Sector or contract services to the Private Sector.
The Action Plan implementation process should be designed to include an iterative approach to reinvent learnings, progress,
standards, principles in order to modify accordingly.
How will the action plan evolve with learnings as it is implemented?
• Survive MOG
• Be bipartisan
• Widen participation during implementation
Response to suggested actions from participants in Engage2Act unconference on 23/3/16
The Productivity Commission recently announced a public inquiry to 'investigate ways to improve the availability and use of
public and private sector data.'
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
Engagement for OGP
'The Commission is required to:
-look at the benefits and costs of making public and private datasets more available
-examine options for collection, sharing and release of data
-identify ways consumers can use and benefit from access to data, particularly data about themselves
-consider how to preserve individual privacy and control over data use.'
5.20
5.21
It would have been good to have this report ready now for use in planning the National Action Plan however when the report is
available it ought to used to inform the implementation of action plan Commitments.
An education campaign to inform the public about relevant 'entry points' into government departments to initiate opportunities for Engagement for OGP
public participation - this requires government to establish information around how, when, why they engage the public and make
this public - so increasing accountability for government. In addition it may contribute to a common understanding of what is and
what is not community engagement/public participation. The IAP2 Quality Assurance Standard for Community and Stakeholder
Engagement may be a useful resource. http://www.iap2.org.au/documents/item/391
An awareness and information around opportunities for the public to participate mean that they dont have to wait to be 'invited to
participate', but are empowered to demand involvement in decision making.
This idea has been added to this theme at the request of Amelia Loye as a way to provide some infrastructure to ensure the
ongoing implementation of the National Action Plan.
Engagement for OGP
An open data/open government Cooperative Research Centre would provide the infrastructure and research commitment
required to make use of open data in the Australian context for policy, business and research purposes. It would also hook up
the government's Innovation program with the open government agenda.
5.22
5.23
5.23.1
5.3
5.4
Engage with regions - not just capital cities
Engagement for OGP
Tap into existing resources:
e.g. telecentres in WA, One stop shop, video links etc State Government Regional Department - who do we link with?
Tasmania have a regional engagement system too
Whatever advisory body is, should have a board member of IAP2
Mechanisms for review and audit process for standard - how can we learn, review and improve
Summary of teleconference 30/3/16. Seven people attended this call: Peter, Rosie, Ash, Ken, Greg, David and I. Engagement to Engagement for OGP
develop the OGP was discussed initially. Questions were asked about engagement with and from the private sector and the
need to develop messaging for that audience / potential data users was discussed. The limits of the Grand Challenges was
raised. Whether themes were helpful was also openly discussed. The group was also informed by one participant that an
independent researcher had been appointed in 2014 to review Australia's implementation of the initial OGP commitment. The
question about the continuity of the NAP if Government of Australia changed was also raised. There was also a question about
whether / how commitments that could not be delivered over two years would be dealt with - now as the first NAP is developed,
and in the development of the next NAP. The importance of cultural change and the role of time in raising awareness /
encouraging engagement was discussed. I suggested the group contact the OGP team with some of these questions.
The rest of the call focused on five topics: 1) Engaging to deliver commitments and actions - with civil society and the States; 2)
Engaging to report NAP progress, and encourage greater engagement in Open Government across Australia; 3) Engagement
for development of the next NAP; 4) Independent NAP review process. When discussing 1) the group felt multi-stakeholder
working groups would be required to help deliver OGP NAP commitments. Across the states and in some cases with civil
society. The discussion around point 2) included the importance of storytelling, the need for a communication plan and forum /
mechanisms that enable the reporting of both NAP progress, and encourage stories from those sharing from those releasing
data, using data, increasing public participation and opening government across Australia. I made the commitment to ensure that
everyone participating in the workshop on 11th April could participate in a discussion about ongoing engagement. Amelia
The teleconference discussion focused heavily on measurement, reporting & accountability as opposed to Commitment ideas
Engagement for OGP
that could ensure engagement between the NAP actions and greater society. Monitoring the progress of action milestones is
important but I don’t think in and of itself that such monitoring (done by a small group) will ensure the success of the NAP. I think
the success of the NAP will be determined by actions put in place to increase awareness, engagement & opportunities for co-
creation of policy.
nDF would also recommend use of a Citizens’ Jury or similar deliberative mechanism using randomly selected participants to
Engagement for OGP
finalise the National Action Plan. This could be incorporated as part of Stages 3 and 4 of the development process which has
been designed by the Australian Open Government Partnership and would be an incredibly powerful way to set the tone for
future openness and transparency. The clear message which would be conveyed through convening a Citizens’ Jury to respond
to the question of “How can we govern ourselves better?” is profound.
4. Overarching Commitment ; when considering each proposedcommitment and the changes proposed,the NAP commit
Engagement for OGP
toidentifying all relevant risks to the integrity of the performance of the proposed changes and the action needed to address
them.
Whatever specific commitments are made and pursued in the NAP,this will be imperative for a successful implementation of
those commitment.
5.5 In the course of the discussion, particularly under the themes of Open Data, Public Service Delivery, and Resource
Engagement for OGP
Management, it emerged that to ensure that action in those areas will be successful, it will be necessary in the NAP to
adequately address the need to change cultures within government and the major weaknesses in the Commonwealth
Government Integrity system, particularly especially those that can impact adversely on policy decisions and procurement
decisions.
In addition, in relation to Open Data, it will necessary to address the need for an appropriate review of the system in place for its
development.
5.6 Customer-designed information platform pilot
Engagement for OGP
Description: Identify three existing service areas with Commonwealth, state and local government delivery, for example
innovation or small business. Develop a customer-designed information platform focused on increasing information accessibility
about available government services to enable people to more effectively navigate and participate in programs and access
services. It is not anticipated the platform would create a new centralised information portal, rather it would focus on ‘front end’
collation and presentation of information and enable responsible areas to manage the ‘back end’ functionality. While government
would enable and coordinate development, customers (randomly selected) would be invited to co-design and test the platform.
5.7 A. Agreement on a Vision Statement.This requires resolutionbefore we embark upon the consultation process to choose the
grand challenges to be addressed and the specific Commitments to be chosen for inclusion in the National Action Plan.(See
Attachment A below for theART Proposed Vision Statement.For background material, -
http://ogpau.wikispaces.com/Vision+for+open+government+in+Australia )
Ongoing engagement6.1
Publish What You Pay (PWYP) Australia believes that the OGP can be used by Australia to improve extractives industry
transparency. We support the comments made below by TIA and strongly endorse Australia progressing with implementation of
the EITI standard. We also support the introduction of mandatory disclosure legislation that requires extractive companies listed
or based in Australia to disclose all payments made to governments on a country-by-country and project-by-project basis. This
legislation should be harmonised with existing laws introduced by the European Union and Governments in Canada and the
United States to the extent that that is possible.
We fully support the position of PWYP Australia on the implementation of EITI standards in Australia and the introduction of
mandatory disclosure legislation similar to the ones in Canada and the US. This will complement our work on transparency and
accountability of the mining sector in the Philippines.
Publish What You Pay UK strongly supports the recommendation of PWYP Australia for extractives industry transparency under
Australia’s OGP NAP, comprising Australia progressing with implementation of the EITI Standard and the introduction of
mandatory disclosure legislation to require extractive companies listed or based in Australia to disclose their payments to
governments on a country-by-country and project-by-project basis. Miles Litvinoff, Coordinator, PWYP UK Government Data for
Access to Information and
Transparency
The ONE Campaign, an international advocacy and campaigning organisation with more than 7 million members globally, fully
supports increasing transparency in the natural resources sector through mandatory disclosure requirements and the EITI, and
endorses the recommendation of PWYP Australia.
SJ Around the Bay is a network of parish social justice groups in the Catholic Diocese of Broken Bay, located the northern region
of Sydney and the Central Coast. This network. This network support the work of PWYP and the implementation of the EITI and
mandatory disclosure of of payments made by companies, on a country by country and project by project basis. Such
transparency with promote a greater level of trust in the community of what large corporations are doing both within Australia and
overseas. It will also enable fact based discussion on the just distribution of the benefits of the extractive industries within the
community. Increasingly people are viewing multinational companies with suspicion and hostility. As they push their way into the
lives of ordinary citizens, invading farm lands, spoiling the environment and depriving indigenous communities of their humble
means of survival (particularly in many poorer countries), they are judged as being powerful, undemocratic and representative of
the rich and greedy. This is a strongly growing trend. While the executives of such companies are legally required to maximise
the financial benefits of their shareholders rather than required to act in a way that is in the best interests of the public generally,
there is a social divide that is likely to grow. Transparency is in the best interests of the community. Government Data for
Access to Information and
Transparency
Government Data for
Access to Information and
Transparency
6.2 Sign the Joint Declaration on Open Government for the Implementation of the 2013 Agenda for Sustainable Development
http://www.opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/files/attachments/OGP_declaration.pdf 6.3 Government Data for
Access to Information and
Transparency
Government Data for
Access to Information and
Transparency
Implement the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative in Australia. Establish a publicly available register of the beneficial
ownership of companies. Greater transparency in public procurement:
Governments should publish in a timely manner the selection criteria and the method of award of any contract before the
procurement process commences;
Governments should collect and disclose the identity and beneficial ownership of all bidders;
Full details of awarded contracts should be disclosed and the details of completion of the contract should be published in a timely
manner with any alterations to the terms of the original contract also disclosed;
Independent monitoring of all stages of the procurement process with a robust, transparent and effective appeals process should
be accessible;
Information on public procurement should be available in open data format – non-proprietary, searchable, sortable, platform-
independent and machine-readable.
Note: This needs more detail to be an actionable item. Have asked for more specific details from the proposer.(note updated
23/12 - TB) Move the OAIC function into the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
2. FOI
Government Data for
Access to Information and
(a) In relation to the OAIC,the Government take action forthwith to
Transparency
• withdraw legislation to abolish the OAIC, and
• allocate the resources necessary for it to fulfil its statutory role as soon as possible. (Para 4.3)
(b) An independent review of the operation of the FOI system including
• obstacles to the effectiveness of the FOI system, and
• whether the objects of the FOI Act, the OGP commitments and principles,and the public office public trust principle are being
served and
• recommendations for improvements (para 4.2)
othe regulation of election funding, to be addressed by a Commitment to adopt a national scheme for the regulation of funding
and campaign spending by political candidates and parties as recommended by the Schott Report and advocated by the Premier
of New South Wales. (Para 5.3.2)
o in the regulation of lobbying, including its limitation to third-party lobbying, lobbying of ministers and parliamentary secretaries,
its failure to require the contemporaneous recording and publication of lobbying activity, and the inadequacies of limits on former
members of Parliament’s and public servants gauging in lobbying activities (5.3.3)
(Note concluding material, para 5.4 and part 6.)
6.1.1
6.1.2
6.1.3
6.1.4
6.4
Government Data for
Access to Information and
Transparency
Government Data for
Access to Information and
Transparency
6.5 Improve access to national data on mining and resource exploration and production projects for citizens
Government Data for
Access to Information and
The Australian Government could ensure all national, state and territories datasets related to mining and production and
associated infrastructure are published in a format easily accessed and understood by citizens. This open dataset will establish Transparency
transparency and drive public participation in the development and management of Australia’s natural resources.
The Australian Government is best placed to coordinate and publish national data related to mining and resource production
applications and projects and their status.
To deliver this the Government will need to support collaboration between all agencies, states and territories and create a way to
enable them to effectively share and publish data in a consistent national structure. This data should be updated daily or weekly,
shareable, and be open in allowing companies and citizens to build on and reuse the data.
6.6 Create community-focused content explaining mining, resources and energy project processes
The Australian Government could provide a single national source of easily understood community-focused information about
our natural resources, mining and production processes, and the rights of citizens and industry. This will foster more open and
better informed discussion between citizens, industry and agencies about management of Australia’s natural resources.
With more state government decisions on resource projects becoming a part of the national conversation, the Australian
Government has the opportunity to create the foundation for an informed discussion by providing national content, including
relevant details for each state and territory.
Educational content created for citizens will transparently explain the different natural resources in Australia, their uses and
values, and the process and impacts of mining/extraction. The participation and cooperation of each state and territory in
providing information about relevant local rules and legislation, will ensure openness is delivered nationally. Content will be
published on a national website and licensed under creative commons to encourage redistribution and reuse.
Government Data for
Access to Information and
Transparency7.1
Hansard, legislation and policy discussion should be available in the JSON format
Publishing debates, reports, bills and acts using the JSON standard will mean Australia could have the world’s first truly
‘programmable’ government.
Open Data
There would be two main advantages. Exposing this material as a JSON (and a RESTful JSON API) will allow a new breed of
analysts and thinkers to work with the content, easily integrating it with other programs and existing interfaces.
7.1.1
7.1.2
The second would be to ready Australian policy makers with the burgeoning field of ‘smart contracts’, distributed data and
decentralised organisations. New technology (including blockchain) depends on this format. The possibilities range from
automating the calculation rates, duties and penalties to crowdsourced-drafting of bills and regulations.
Provide linkages between the law that requires data to be collected and the published open data
Open Data
One potential step is to create a data register by agency on what data they hold, what state it is in, and what access is permitted. Open Data
This could become a bi-annual report to government and available to all agencies to help those making decisions to understand
where the data supporting their decision process may already exist and be sourced.
It could then be reviewed and released publicly (where there's no security implications), providing insights for industry and the
civic sector on what data is potentially accessible from government to inform economic and social decision processes, as well as
providing a gap analysis on what data government doesn't hold and a runway for individuals and organisations to request
specific datasets to be publicly published as open data, or selectively shared with researchers to inform future policy work.
From this a high value data list could be determined through the interaction of the various players.
7.1.3
Such a list should identify gaps in data, so that social and environmental impacts can be covered comprehensively. OGP must
be about more than "how to make money out of government-generated data"
Creating the opportunity and mechanism for the public to contribute to this list is a good way to engage a broad audience with
open data, to move beyond the current focus on the interests of developers and the short term thinking of hackfests. The health
and welfare communities have specific data-sets in mind that they wish to have opened to improve policy outcomes. Providing a
formal opportunity for these groups (and the wider research community) to provide input into such a list would build both interest
and trust in open data/open government.
Establish a single place to discover all consultations, publications, policies - it is currently difficult for people to contribute
meaningfully to government because it is hard to find what is going on, what has already been decided, what the priorities of the
government of the day are, and what research has been conducted to date.
Establish a participatory budget approach. Each year there should be a way for the public to give ideas and feedback to the
budget process, to help identify community priorities and potential savings.
Establish a regular Community Estimates session. Senate Estimates is a way for the Senate to hold the government and
departments to account however, often the politics of the individuals involved dominates the approach. What if we implemented
an opportunity for the public to do the same? There would need to be a rigorous way to collect and prioritise questions from the
public that was fair and representative, but it could be an excellent way to provide greater accountability which is not (or should
not be) politicised. (full blog post on my personal submission at http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-submission/)
Open Data
7.1.8 Establish a regular Community Estimates session. Senate Estimates is a way for the Senate to hold the government and
departments to account however, often the politics of the individuals involved dominates the approach. What if we implemented
an opportunity for the public to do the same? There would need to be a rigorous way to collect and prioritise questions from the
public that was fair and representative, but it could be an excellent way to provide greater accountability which is not (or should
not be) politicised. (full blog post on my personal submission at http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-submission/)
Open Data
7.1.9 Can we incentivise senior management/elected reps to be responsible for engagement themselves- i.e. personally Response to Open Data
suggested actions from participants at the Ark Community Engagement Conference 22/3/16
Data sets held should be included in the list of materials subject to the pro-active publication provisions of the FOI act.
Open Data
Develop a central register of all public research undertaken, or to be undertaken, by federal agencies that provides details of the Open Data
scope and links to publicly reported outcomes. Over time could be linked to the raw data for reuse by other agencies/external
entities per other open data and internally could become a mechanism for agencies to find existing research relevant to policy
processes and to collaborate on research projects where the similar data collection could serve the goals of different agencies.
Potential to expand to states & local gov in longer-term as a central public research repository and matching system.
7.1.4
7.1.5
7.1.6
7.1.7
7.1.10
7.2
Open Data
Open Data
Open Data
Open Data
7.2.1
7.3 Can be connected to Tanya O'Dea's proposal: Develop a federal research register
Many government organisation are ready to publish their data as open data, but if each organisation publishes the same data
with different columns and schemas it will be hard to aggregate. If there was some guidance and support to create a wiki or
resource where these standards could be interactively developed it would be of huge assistance. A good example of this is
http://opencouncildata.org/ but needs more support and adoption. Open Data
Open Data
7.3.1
7.3.2 here's some more standards to consider adopting http://queensland.theodi.org/home/resources/standards/
Refer to my comment on StephenGates' proposal: Assist the 500+ local councils that haven't yet published open data to do so Open Data
Open Data
7.4 Suggestion to meet - *Access to Information, *Open Data and *Openness in Natural Resources areas
Open Data
NEED: Extending access and use of existing Australian best practice information by Government institutions and participating
community groups
BACKGROUND: I have observed over many years the National Parks and Wildlife Services and aboriginal groups trying to work
towards an ongoing collaboration. What I don't understand is why the Service staff do not check for current successful
‘collaboration’ programs (or part thereof) in their own Service to share with the people involved in the project. An example of a
successful program is that of Mungo National Park.
STRATEGY AND MEASUREMENT: To expand use of valuable information by Government and Community groups.
A five step process can begin
Gather and make best practice collaboration program reports easily findable (a one stop shop);
Notifying (regularly - twice a year) all regions that this 'one stop shop' is available, and that
A Service person or persons are required to log in to this 'shop' each month, search for information associated with their annual
projects, and distribute the results (via email with links or as paper copies for people without email) to people responsible for
project delivery and all members of the project team; including the Community groups.
All project leaders must personally load their final reports to the ‘shop’.
These logins are recorded and reported.
There may be a better way - but I haven't witnessed use of current successful processes in the Service and local aboriginal
group discussions.
Open Data
Activity - Sharing Best Practice across government and government funded organisations
OGP Sharing Best Practice - activity suggestion
7.5
Need: An easy way to find best or good practice examples across and within government and government funded organisations
OPG category - *Access to Information, *Open Data and *Openness in Natural Resources areas
Background
I have observed over many years the National Parks and Wildlife Services and aboriginal groups trying to work towards an
ongoing collaboration. What I don't understand is why the Service staff do not check for current successful ‘collaboration’
programs (or part thereof) in their own Service to share with the people involved in the project. An example of a successful
program is that of Mungo National Park.
Strategy and Measurement
To expand use of valuable information by Government and Community groups. A five step process can begin
• Gather and make best practice collaboration program reports easily findable (a one stop shop);
• Notifying (regularly - twice a year) all regions that this 'one stop shop' is available
• AND that
• A Service person or persons are required to log in to this 'shop' each month, search for information associated with their annual
projects, and distribute the results (via email with links or as paper copies for people without email) to people responsible for
project delivery and all members of the project team; including the Community groups.
• All project leaders must personally load their final reports to the ‘shop’.
• These logins are recorded and reported.
There may be a better way - but I haven't witnessed use of current successful processes in the Service and local aboriginal
group discussions.7.6
Problem: Many reports and resources commissioned by government departments and agencies are not made public.
This could be addressed with 3 strategies:
1. Review and strengthen guidelines for making information resources commissioned or produced by government departments
and agencies public to ensure all material is made public unless there are identifiable security or other justifiable reasons not to
do so.
2. Set targets and measure results for open publishing and use of creative commons licenses
3. Develop a government open access policy similar to the ARC and NHMRC
An open access policy should be adopted for all government funded research published in academic journals. These could be
similar to that of the ARC and the NHMRC and should also encourage use of open access journals where available.
Open Data
This proposal would also require the established of a government document repository or some other solution for effective
storage, discovery and access - this has been submitted as a separate item.
7.6.1
7.6.2
It is, if the reports are made public. If they aren't its either an FOI issue, a management issue or an openness issue. Reports are Open Data
withheld for a variety of reasons and public servants needs to be clear on what these are and be able to justify not making a
report public. We have the Gov 2.0 theory but not yet the practice.
Open Data
As I hear it, the problem with many reports and resources commissioned by government departments and agencies not being
made public is implementation of existing policies, guidelines etc. As Amanda points out "We have the Gov 2.0 theory but not yet
the practice."
We need suggestions that will improve compliance, as well as plugging any holes found in policy.
Sharing b
Open Data
7.6.3
This suggestion closely aligns with concept of a "Gov API" or "Mashable Government". Pia Waugh describes the end goal:
https://www.dto.gov.au/blog/making-government-discoverable/
To achieve "Gov API" in a long term sustainable manner is non-trivial, but can be broken down into many small steps. Key
concepts which need to be considered are:
Open Standards facilitate wide scale and long term interoperability. However there is tension between "quick fixes", or "vendor
lock-in APIs" versus open standards adoption.
Adopting existing international standards is often an option and should be encouraged where available. Contributing to
development of international standards is time consuming, and involves long term commitments to do well.
It is important to enable whole-of-government strategies while also facilitating rapid innovation.
Maintenance strategies: IT assets, such as government data, rapidly become dated and need refreshing and/or archiving. As
such whole-of-life maintenance strategies should be considered.
Business Cases: (This is worthy of a suggestion by itself). Government agencies should be provided with strategies and
guidelines to write business cases to predict the success versus cost of different Gov API strategies. Typically government
officials have mandate to solve department-wide problems, however solutions will often be best justified at a Whole-Of-
Government, or Whole-Of-World level. One particular argument is "If I invest in an Open Standard, or Open Source product, I will
see minimal immediate benefit, but long term will see international adoption which will lead to advancement of my local goals."
7.7
Problem/issue to be addressed
Open Data
Publications and other resources produced or commissioned by government departments and agencies are notoriously difficult
to find and access for a number of reasons including having publication withheld, or disappearing from online access due to poor
management practices and lack of a public repository for government material.
Main objective
Improve the discovery and accessibility of government publications, data and other resources to maximise long term public
access and use of government research and information by investing in publishing infrastructure, principles and practices.
Strategy: Establish an open publications repository for government documents
Establish a public, open access, online, whole-of-government publication and resource repository for publishing and ongoing
access and management of government publications.This could utilise and extend an existing external repository to integrate
with other policy resources (using APO for example apo.org.au), use a government-run system (data.gov.au) or be a new
product developed for this purpose. It should be interoperable with data.gov.au and other data sources to link publications and
date and would be able to be harvested by Archives and other organisations as required but also be public facing and dynamic
to work with the fast pace of public policy.
7.7.1
7.7.2 This could be connected to my proposal for a research directory and Tanya's proposal above.
Yes, I agree. The collection of publications and metadata about research, agencies, etc can all be part of the one database.
Open Data
Open Data
7.8 Open Data
This comment is provided by the National Archives of Australia (the National Archives). The National Archives was established
by the Archives Act 1983 as an executive agency of the Australian Government, although it has existed in various forms since
the 1940s. The National Archives is the lead agency for ensuring transparency and accountability in government through its
legislated role of setting records and information management requirements for Australian Government agencies, and preserving
and providing a public right of access to government information.
Open government increases the transparency and accountability of government, encourages greater public engagement,
strengthens governance and improves public service delivery. The National Archives plays a key role in open government by
promoting the creation, management and preservation of authentic, reliable and usable Commonwealth information, and
facilitating access to this information.
The Archives Act 1983 provides a broad definition of records and effectively covers all information created, used or received in
the course of Commonwealth business. Under the Archives Act 1983 (Cth) (Archives Act), the National Archives:
•identifies the archival resources of the Commonwealth;
•preserves and makes the archival resources of the Commonwealth accessible;
•oversees Commonwealth records management;
•determines standards and provides advice to Commonwealth agencies; and
•imposes recordkeeping obligations in respect of Commonwealth records.
Ready access to this information is vital for maintaining the transparency of the democratic process and the accountability of
successive governments, and is integral to a successful open government policy. It is from this perspective and with this
legislated role that the National Archives provides the following observations and comments on the Vision and the framework for
the National Action Plan.
7.9
7.10
7.11
7.11.1
7.12
Vision
The National Archives supports a Vision that commits to the improved management of, and accessibility to, information and
records. A key element of this is a move to fully digital information management and business processes across the Australian
government sector. This aligns with key commitments identified in the National Action Plans of the United States, Canada and
the United Kingdom. It also aligns with the example Vision statement provided that ‘Open government in the 21st century needs
to translate to digital processes and reporting to improve transparency and accountability’. This has already been achieved by a
number of initiatives which the National Archives is currently leading including earlier access to government records, the Digital
Continuity 2020 Policy, an end-to-end solution to manage digital government information, and modernisation of the Archives Act.
With regard to models for such an enterprise, I can only endorse the NZ comparison and strongly recommend that you look at
Open Data
the UK initiatives in relation to open government and open data. Placing the open data strategy within the ambit of the National
Archives. along with Her Majestys’ Stationery Office, focuses on government information across all sectors – creation, use, reuse
and preservation.
http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/united-kingdom
Open data can provide useful input to both Grand Challenges of Improving Public Services and More Effectively Managing
Open Data
Public Resources. The government has done its own research on the benefit of administrative open data sets published by the
Productivity Commission (2012-13). I think a useful goal for the OGP National Action Plan would be to compile a list of high
value data-sets that can be used to contribute to better policy, transparency and accountability and then oversee the release of
these data-sets along with implementing a feedback process to ensure the data produced is usable. This list should be created
in collaboration with the public and provide a standard to facilitate maximising the value that can be created through open data.
Develop a federal research register
Open Data
To allow more informed citizen participation in policy debate, make a commitment to publish (redacted only where absolutely
necessary) all business cases for major government initiatives and all independent evaluations of policies and programs. In the
case of proposed initiatives, it would allow citizens to be aware of the options considered and the relative pros and cons of each
proposal; in the case of evaluations, it would allow citizens to be aware of factual information about the success or failure of
policies and programs. Citizens deserve to be able to make up their own minds based on factual information, not through the
lens of the 'spin' of either government or opposition, and to question decisions which do not appear to be supported by the facts
or independent recommendations - or at least require the government to be more accountable to the public for the decisions it
makes.
This could be connected to my proposal for a research directory - which had a goal of informing government agencies of the
Open Data
research activities by other agencies and supporting more collaborative research across portfolios where this was cost-effective.
The public exposure of this research, base, benchmarking & comparative (policy) to the public at an appropriate point in the
policy formation process, with appropriate privacy management, would support more informed and factual policy debates and
reduce the hyperbole and misreporting we see in current policy discussions.
Comment: Open Data Institute in the UK has run a highly successful challenge series, whereby social/economic/environmental Open Data
challenges are solved. Building on Code for Australia's idea, this is something that could be achieved locally in Australia.7.12.1
7.12.2
A link to the Open Data Challenge Series as mentioned above by way of example, seems to have disappeared. Here it is:
http://theodi.org/opendatachallengeseries
Articulous worked with ODIQ and the Brisbane City Council recently on a cut-down version of the challenge - Brisbane Open
Data Project - part of which was for their citizens to address the issues of sustainability, liveability, safety and driving economic
growth.
Open Data
Open Data
We propose upscaling this ODI challenge model trailed with BCC and engage with the broader Australian community on a range
of issues at a federal level particularly in the areas of health, sustainability and innovation. Let's hear what the burning issues are
and:
- identify potential solutions using open data
- collaborate with data custodians to ensure access to data that is capable of helping understand or solve the specific challenge,
and
7.13
7.13.1
7.14
- work with industry partners, developers and digital innovators to create solutions.
Baseline the maturity of the open data publishing practice of all Australian Government Departments and Agencies using a free
online tool such as the Open Data Institute's Open Data Pathway. This is a great way to benchmark the 'now', guide each
Department in setting targets (the 'where') and develop a practical action plan (the 'how'). It also results in more meaningful
measurement of progress as we move forward.
Open Data
A link to the Open Data Pathway as mentioned above by way of an example mechanism for elevating open data publishing
Open Data
practice is available here: http://queensland.theodi.org/home/services/pathway/
Open Data
In August 2015 the NZ Government agreed to establish a Data Futures Partnership, a cross-sector group of influential people
working together to drive high-trust and high-value data use for all New Zealanders. Australia could take a similar approach, and
in particular use and adapt the 'catalyst project' seed funding model NZ is developing to foster more data driven innovation, more
open data release, and more effective trusted data sharing.
Background:
The NZ Data Futures Forum consultation process found there are likely to be huge economic, social and environmental
opportunities from treating data as a national strategic asset. It also found that driving social and economic value from data
requires a collective effort across the public, private and NGO sectors.
It noted that:
1. The data-use ecosystem is hard to navigate - Data practices and relationships are complex and emerging, and the existing
institutions and frameworks are not designed for the emerging environment. There is no clear, authoritative guidance for
Ministers and policy makers, or for the people and organisations sharing and using data.
2. Potential for much greater data sharing - Public and private sector organisations have rich data but are unwilling or feel unable
to share – because acceptable boundaries for sharing and reuse may be unclear.
3. Tenuous trust - Public trust in the data-use ecosystem is tenuous and, once lost, trust can be hard to restore. Maintaining trust
is vital to ongoing data innovation, including Government’s reuse of data to drive investment decisions and target services. There
is no independent trusted forum for an inclusive conversation on data use.
4. Potential for more data reuse and innovation to create economic and social value - People and organisations are not using
data as much as they could to create value – because of lack of understanding of the value, lack of access to data, fears of
negative reactions, or practical barriers such as no data standards or lack of analytics capability.
7.15
The Data Futures Partnership is focusing on three streams of work:
- Catalyst Projects to demonstrate the value of data use, and help create ethical and practical frameworks.
- Diagnose and fix ongoing and emerging issues in the data-use ecosystem.
- Facilitate a conversation with New Zealanders about the potential value of data use, and to understand their feelings and
perspectives on data use.
TOPICS
Open Data. A linked data system would:
- Present the complete picture without administrative boundaries on topics that interest citizens and governments
- Connect the data silos by creating standardised APIs across agencies
- Create a standard workflow for releasing, updating, and using open data by processing all datasets in the same manner
through an automated and repeatable process
- Generate five-star open data for all datasets.
Open Data
PRINCIPLES
- Transparency. An improved workflow for releasing data through an automated linked data workflow will contribute to greater
transparency.
- Technology and Innovation. Linked data introduces an innovative system and approach to managing transparency as well as
managing public contributions to open data, fostering increased usage for all.
What successful implementation of the idea would look like
A linked data portal will achieve the following:
- Relevant and easy access to government data by citizens
- Specific and focussed search, as well as discoverability of data
- Easy publishing and automatic extraction of topics from data, decreasing the amount of processing
- Workflows for any data contribution.
Government
1. Lisa wants to release her agency's education data, currently stored in proprietary formats, so that it can be used for a
consultant to develop an app
2. She uploads the data into the linked data portal
3. The portal automatically extracts entities in the data (eg: 'University of Sydney', 'CSIRO', 'National Portrait Gallery') and
locations (eg: 'Brisbane', 'Carlton VIC')
4. The portal then creates an API (Application Programming Interface) for the consultant to develop the app
5. Lisa can re-upload the data at any time to update.
7.16
7.17
Citizens
1. Mustafa is researching primary schools for his family around his suburb of Carlton, Victoria
Open Data in Regional Australia: Articulous recently worked with a consortium of local government council's in regional New
Open Data
South Wales on a pilot project to mitigate the health issues associated with the increase in the number and severity of recent
heatwaves that have been linked to climate change. This pilot is at the start of a 5 year lifespan and it would be invaluable to
incorporate open data from the specific fields of climate and health to enable a much more targeted and rigorous engagement of
the potentially effected population. Often in regional areas specific individuals or clusters of citizens are hard to service or even
locate due to their geographical isolation.
There are a number of posts, in different themes across the wiki, suggesting a directory / portal / list of open government & open Open Data
information initiatives and resources etc. For example, see "Compile a list of high value data-sets" by BudgetAus below & and
Pia Waugh's submission: http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-submission/.
In my opinion much of the right model for such a portal would be that provided by the EU Open Data Monitor
(http://opendatamonitor.eu/) as proposed below by StephenGates ("Bring the Open Data Monitor to Australia to help in the
discovery and assessment of open data quality").
7.18
7.19
7.19.1
7.19.2
The role of a similar portal in AU would be to provide a central catalogue/directory view of initiatives & information and to foster
and document the likely disparate usage terms & conditions, formats and interfaces underlying the information & resources. The
portal should not, I think, provide any underlying centralised data storage nor identity / access management function to
information and resources.
The United States and other countries have established teams responsible for 'declassification', or opening, of government
archives that were closed under past decisions. Access norms and expectations change. Such a group could be established and
managed by the NAA to ensure that these valuable government records, covering all aspects of Australian life, are made
available to the Australian people in a timely manner.
Currently Commonwealth agencies operate under two different sets of rules and accompanying approaches to the release of
information. FOI, which is limited by its use of the word 'document' in reference to information that can be requested, and open
data policies, aimed at structured information. This is an unhelpful distinction. All formats of information - from databases to
documents and everything else should be easy to apply for under FOI, and all should be eligible for proactive release. Suggest
necessary amendments to FOI legislation to remove use of 'document'.
Correction: there aren't only two sets of rules - there are lots more eg privacy law, archives law, But the intention in this comment
is to focus on the tension between FOI's 'documents' and open data :) CF
This is just one aspect that illustrates the need to modernise the FOI act, made all the more urgent by the transition by
government agencies to entirely digital work processes. Section 17 of the FOI act and its reference to computers is straight out
of-well 1982, when the law came into effect. My proposal for a short review is in the Freedom of Information theme.
Open Data
Open Data
Open Data
Open Data7.20
7.21
Open Data can dramatically decrease the real and opportunity costs to not for profits and other organisations. We have seen the Open Data
power of shared measurement in many of the collective impact initiatives in the US and there is an increasing call for 'population
level' data sets here in Australia to assist collaborations report and mobilise around common agendas. Without access to timely
and quality data these efforts will be stalled. There is a moment in time while people are putting together dashboards/scorecards
etc to enable these communities - health, education, employment, justice, economic data is all necessary and needs to be
accessible in raw formats (and not 3 year old data sets). How can communities hold not for profits and government to account if
they can't access timely and accurate data? For better outcomes we need data to benchmark and track outcomes and also
understand the context of these communities.
Using Open data to get the best talent into Government Departments, changing work culture: Transparency in Hiring and
Open Data
Promotions in government departments and business units
Some departments advertise with the clear intent to hire, some advertise just to meet the legal requirements. Frequently, some
departments or business units carry out hiring and promotions internally because of a culture of everyone "fit in". In such
instances, there are no new ideas coming in, there is no one to question internal decisions (because all employees are made of
the same mold). This culture perpetuates itself. This results in a lack of Innovation in policy making, lack of innovation in other
fields including procurement and infrastructure development (including ICT, communication or implementing OGP ideals). There
is no dissent- because there are no dissenters.
Actions Item:
Each subunit of each government department should be required to disclose on its own website and its hiring advertisements as
to the absolute number of new hires from outside the group in the past one year, and the number hired internally- including
contractors already working there. Such data should be provided/published in a form that can be scrapped by open-data bots
and consolidated for access by the public.
7.21.1
To make OGP successful, we need to have employees at Departments wanting to do the right thing.
I agree that this is a grave and timely issue. Let me introduce commitment 20 from the current French NAP, which is very
related:
Open Data
DIVERSIFY RECRUITMENT WITHIN PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS
LEAD INSTITUTIONS: Ministry for Decentralization and the Civil Service
STAKES
The civil service has a duty to be exemplary by reflecting the French society it serves, with its diversity and its evolutions.
CONTEXT & AIM
The State undertakes to facilitate the recruitment of diversified profiles that not only reflect French society, but also that are
necessary to support the administrations through digital and open government evolutions.
ROADMAP
Develop new access channels to the civil service, to improve its opening to society
- In the Bill on ethics and the rights and obligations of civil servants, insert measures to renew access channels to civil service
and open them a larger diversity of profiles
- Renew the preparatory classes mechanism for access to competitive examinations of category A in the three branches of the
civil service, particularly by increasing by 25% the number of places offered in the integrated preparatory classes preparing
candidates for the competitive examinations for entry to the civil service from 2015. The objective for 2016 is to double the
number of students, to reach 1,000 places
- Develop apprenticeship in the civil service by multiplying by 10 the number of apprentices, to reach an objective of 4,000 by the
beginning of the 2016 school year and 10,000 for 2017
Address discriminatory biases upon entry into the civil service
- Upon request from the Prime Minister, launch an expert appraisal mission on discrimination issues
- Modify the texts on juries and selection committee’s composition for each ministry to open them to at least one member outside
the recruiting administration
- Generalize training courses on discrimination prevention for all future members of juries and selection committees
- Generalize the procedures for the quality certification of human resources departments in order to evaluate all their procedures
with regard to any discriminatory risks. Ashok, your proposed action is very simple and costs almost nothing to the departments,
but arguably the first step towards addressing this problem. Hopefully, it becomes part of a commitment. Even if it does not,
simple things like this could be easily implemented IF the government is willing...
7.22
7.23
7.24
7.25
7.26
Open Data - dealing with cross jurisdictional issues: Many policies dealing with the every day lives of people are administered by Open Data
states which makes the state agencies the custodians. Such data-sets are important to the issues that the health and welfare
sectors would like to see opened for better policy & funding transparency. Other than the Australian Institute of Health & Welfare,
the only other avenue of collaboration between jurisdictions in relation to the collection of data that I am aware of is the Cross
Jurisdictional Open Data Government Community Forum which is a quarterly meeting that discusses open data case studies and
issues.
I propose this cross jurisdictional committee be used to create a structure or process (separate to their private meetings)
whereby the public can engage with the states to begin to harmonise the open data-sets that are produced by each state and
territory so that data-sets on similar topics in each jurisdiction (eg traffic, crime) can be published in a consistent manner with
regard to the fields they contain, the frequency with which they are updated and other characteristics that affect their re-use as
open data.
Open Data
3. Establish and enforce metadata standards for publishing data and publications
- Establishing document/resource ownership can be a challenge sometimes when it comes to government publications. It would
be helpful if resources were more clearly marked than they are currently. Parent/child relationships would be a good place to
start. Eg: Australian Government, Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Office for Women. Copyright ownership also needs
to be reformed to be more consistent. In the example given, resources can labelled Copyright Commonwealth of Australia OR
Copyright Australian Government OR Copyright Office for Women. A publishing standard, which ONLY attributes copyright to the
'master' owner, would be a great reform.
2. Discover, access and management of government publications
Open Data
- Another observation (and this mainly applies to state government departments) would be to stop uploading reports as Word
docs. PDF should always be the default format, especially helpful for researchers that need to keep pagination consistent for
citation purposes.
Open Data
Just to pick up on some of the points raised by Amanda Lawrence - in relation to government publications
2. Discover, access and management of government publications
- Most federal and state government publications are usually 'findable' close to release date. Older publications can be a bit more
problematic. NLA and Trove collections are often a first port-of-call for researchers trying to receive historical publications.
Allowing third party repositories, that have the (content management) systems to publish associated copyright information, to
archive such documents improves the chances of policy researchers to retrieve and evaluate publicly-funded policy resources.
1) XML feeds for all parliamentary data including Hansard, comlaw, annual reports, pbs', MP expenses and declaration of
interests in data form with notifications of changes. This would make this important democratic content more accessible, easier
to analyse and easier to monitor.
Open Data
2) Publishing of all the federal budget information in data format on budget night, including the tables throughout the budget
papers, the data from the Portfolio Budget Statements (PBSs) and anything else of relevance. This would make analysing the
budget easier. There have been some efforts in this space but it has not been fully implemented.
7.27
7.28
7.29
(Full blog post on my personal submission at http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-submission/)
FOI requests (ongoing as well as closed) and their outcomes (and documents provided to applicants) should be published on the Open Data
Home Page of the department or business unit. For example, CentreLink should have a link to all FOI related matters. If it is not
possible on the top of the page, a link should be provided at least at the bottom of the Home Page. Data format should be open
data bot scrappable.
Achieving internal Transparency within government departments and sub-units using bot scrappable open data. In government Open Data
departments, when new positions or groups are created, the business unit would be required to inform all employees in that
group (and all its cohorts and parent groups up to the first SES level) about the rationale for creating the position or group,
source of funding, and goals for the new group or position. This will prevent new groups or positions being created without being
much thought over long term needs, and also prevent groups just because funding is available or it fancies a particular person.
This would, at least in a small way, insulate interference from elected leaders or lobby groups.
Policies and decisions made by such newly created groups can potentially become an impediment for other groups, they can
become ill-managed and wasteful. Instead of a lean and efficient government, we could be left paying the salaries of a group for
decades, this group being a hindrance, rather than help, to better governance. Keeping information free flowing and open will
prevent frequent occurrences of such cases. Before the creation of such a group, data should be published in a form that can be
scrapped by open-data bots and consolidated for public viewing. When there is a need to be become transparent, there will be
caution
Personal Data has value. By making it Open to the person the person can realise the value. What and how to make it open
depends on context; as it does with all data.
Instead of thinking of Open Data we can think of Open Access in Context. Applications define context. Rather than think of
opening data we can think of opening applications. With personal data we have the added complication of privacy. Allowing
individuals to use approved applications to access personal data removes the privacy issue.
We can use the same approach for all data. That is, Open Data through Open Access in context
Open Data7.29.1
Trial opening applications instead of opening data. Organizations holding data are responsible for the data. They can approve
applications that access data.
Open Data
To that end an ogpau action item could be:
Run one or more trials using open applications on personal data.
7.30
7.31
7.32
Reinvest part of the savings or income generated from the open applications to fund further trials.
Summary of Open Data teleconference 30/3/16. Eight people attended this teleconference: Ash, Ken, Kevin, Linda, Tim, Mel,
Open Data
Rosie and I. We discussed the need for data standardisation, cultural change, greater transparency around data sets available,
participation in the release / prioritisation process and accessibility of open data sets released across Australian States.
Participants felt that the Federal Government should play a coordinating role and that cross-jurisdictions structures should be
established and managed by Federal Government to coordinate this. There was mention of an Open Data Steering Committee
and COAG. The group felt that engagement between those responsible for the release of data was as important as well as
executive commitment, and the importance of cross-jurisdictional engagement from staff in similar agencies across was
emphasised. A communication strategy and 'How to guide' was also suggested by participants as other ways this coordinating
body might to make these processes, and data release across Australia more transparent, increase awareness of it's value and
promote use. Amelia
List of high value open data-sets. Perhaps I was not clear enough. The list of high value data-sets I suggested as a an OGP
Open Data
Commitment is not intended to be decided by government but by the public.
While everything could be considered data, for most people data is different to publications or other kinds of resources. Its great Open Data
and important to make more data available but other resources such as government reports and discussion papers,
submissions, FOI type material, archival material etc are very badly managed and are highly likely to be overlooked if the theme
is Open Data. Why wouldn't FOI be part of this theme? Is it because information is not considered data? It doesn't make sense
to separate them. Moving away from a data only focus would also help to engage many people who aren't necessarily interested
in data but do want better access and management of other types of Public sector information such as government publications
and records of many kinds, both public and restricted.
If you did this then you can see we have a few main suggestions. If you look at the list below its basically:
1. discovery, access and management of data, including publication of specific, high value datasets
2. discover, access and management of government publications
3. Establish and enforce metadata standards for publishing data and publications
4. collation of data on government activities such as research projects, donations etc
plus if you take the ideas from FOI it covers
5. Greater support for FOI and the OAIC,
6. Copyright reform to introduce fair use or fair dealing type legislation
I'm not trying to reduce anyone's ideas here, just to show how data is related to and part of the wider government information
ecosystem, including legislation, and it might be more productive to have an overall strategic approach to information, not just
data.
7.32.1
7.33
7.33.1
Amanda Yes "data" needs to be seen in the broader context of information. FOI reforms in 2010 included a small step in
Open Data
extending pro-active publication requirements. Data sets ( and format issues) should be subject to mandatory provisions of the
FOI act not as now left to discretion.
Assist the 500+ local councils that haven't yet published open data to do so: Do this in a standard way that helps people answer Open Data
questions without knowing what jurisdiction they're in
Open Data
Part of this approach should include support for standardising how data is collected and published by local councils (or for a
standardised subset of data collected alongside any jurisdiction-specific data), or providing mapping of council data to a common
central standard with a data quality metric (such as the 5 star system) to allow effective comparison and aggregation of data
across LGAs. This would also help address reuse as there is far more economic and social value (and hence incentive) in
developing a service that is national than a service that is functional and accurate for only one LGA, or necessitates a great deal
of data matching and cleaning at significant expense for 500+ datasets with slightly different collection and publishing standards.
I recognise that data standards are painful to negotiate and implement and often fall foul of specific interests, but if this process
can be negotiated, the outcome provides broad and deep value and long-term savings.
7.33.2
Another idea is, given that the majority of councils publish on data.gov.au, streamline the data publishing pipeline to make it easy Open Data
to publish high quality data.
E.g.
- upload data
- nice UI to add contextual information about the data
- automatically infer a schema from the data
- optionally allow the user to refine the schema (e.g. a column identified as a string, could be a set of valid values. Let the users
define these)
- check the data against the schema and report errors
- allow the user to fix errors or publish with data quality statement
- publish to CKAN
On the consumer-side, display the human-readable context, schema and data quality statements and make machine-readable
versions available programmatically.
Many of the components to do this already exist as part of the Open Knowledge Frictionless Data project http://data.okfn.org/
7.33.3
7.34
7.34.1
7.34.2
7.35
7.35.1
7.35.2
7.35.3
7.36
7.36.1
7.37
7.37.1
7.37.2
7.38
7.39
Open Data
Local Councils tend to collect and manage highly valuable local-centric data. In our experience gained working with private
sector consumers of data, demand for local-centric data far outweighs supply. It is so important to help local government become
gold star publishers through guides and tools which make it EASY. These suggestions are great.
Release all data maintained by the Public Sector Mapping Authority as Open Data: Fund the PSMA to continue their good work Open Data
but publish the data openly.
The Queensland and Federal Infrastructure Plans both identify data as a key enabler to get the most from our infrastructure
investments. Releasing a national transportation network should be one of the first objectives.
PSMA has released it's Admin Boundaries as open data - is this proposal still relevant or can it be redefined to more specific
datasets?
https://www.psma.com.au/products/transport-topography
Open Data
Open Data
https://www.psma.com.au/products/postcode-boundaries
Bring the Open Data Monitor to Australia to help in the discovery and assessment of open data quality:
Open Data
http://opendatamonitor.eu/
http://project.opendatamonitor.eu
Perhaps a good commitment to be delivered in partnership with one or more civic societies. Government could fund, civic society Open Data
could execute.
Great suggestion Craig. The open data monitor is a collaboration between a number of organisations
Open Data
http://opendatamonitor.eu/frontend/web/index.php?r=site%2Fimprint
Perhaps the Open Data Institute and/or a University could run the project in Australia.
The ODI would be happy to Stephen.
Adopt Open Data Certificates to demonstrate publisher best practice, so open data can be used with confidence:
https://certificates.theodi.org/en/
Open Data
Open Data
ODI Queensland are localising Open Data Certificates for Australia http://queensland.theodi.org/home/projects/odc/
Open data certificates are all about building and promoting trust and confidence in using data. This is critical in order to address Open Data
one of open data's biggest challenges: USABILITY of open or shared data. We are hoping to complete our localisation work in
the next few months as we finalise and eliminate as much complexity as possible via the 'help guides'. It would be great to see
these applied across all open data portals in all Australian jurisdictions.
The internet of things is coming and Australia's open data platforms aren't ready. They generally publish snapshots of databases Open Data
and present them as CSV files.
Prepare a strategy and reference implementation for how all levels of government can collectively publish sensor data and it be
easily joined together and interoperate to solve real-world problems.
An API-based approach would be valuable for this - perhaps building on the work done at the DTO pre-November 2015 that I'm
not sure has been pursued as vigorously in the last few months.
Some good work being dome in this space by GOV.UK
https://gds.blog.gov.uk/2016/03/11/getting-from-data-to-registers/
Publish machine-readable metadata with your open data. Make open data easy to process and understand. Adopt a standard
such as:
- CSV for the Web by W3C https://www.w3.org/TR/2016/NOTE-tabular-data-primer-20160225/
- Data Packages by Open Knowledge http://data.okfn.org
Open Data
Open Data
Open Data
to describe the most common open data format Comma Separated Value (CSV) files
Data is well covered by comments- but the use of it is not. Require models used on Open Gov data, and results of the analyses Open Data
done, be made cc0 and visible: Require models and analyses done on Open Gov Data be fed back to open gov repositories and
the models themselves be declared cc0...and available7.40
7.5
Proposal: Streamline government IT purchasing practices to understand, then capitalise upon the opportunities of open
technologies: open source, open data, open standards, open architectures.
Open Data
Government IT investment would benefit greatly from increased adoption of open technologies, however government purchasing
practices inadvertently favour proprietary, vendor lock-in strategies over open business models. A paper should be written
exploring the fundamentals behind this dilemma, leading to changes in purchasing practices, and the provision of purchasing
guidelines for assessing the difference between different open products, and comparing the value of open and proprietary
business strategies.
Identify a process for Government agencies to share what data sources they are working on so as to avoid duplication but also Open Data
to share costs in developing data
Public Service Delivery - how Government works with other agencies, the community and industry, how citizens find services
Again, the USA have established a Digital Strategythat requires all Federal Government Agencies to identify what they are doing
to provide open data (https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/egov/digital-government/digital-
government.html#milestone-1-1) and although this has been enforced within the Federal Government, local American state
governments are also using the strategy to guide the their digital strategy work (I worked on one for dc.gov but there was no
facility to share with other state governments), there was no facility to publish along with the Federal agencies to allow sharing
and understanding between all levels of government.Australia could benefit from ensuring whatever the NAP involves that all
state and territory governments also participate and that there is a way to ensure a sharing of knowledge, skills and costs.
An example of where data projects can be shared is in the mapping space; there are various other government departments who
are working on mapping solutions and who are making great headway in the UX and access of data particularly in the mobile
space and this could be where the National Map and other government departments should pool resources to provide improved
mapping facilities (including the data they are gathering and providing) but having some standards and guides in place for
mapping usability and accessibility.
7.6
Reporting of data and information
Open Data
With the establishment of the Public Management Reform Agenda (PMRA) there will be a change in how information is reported
by government departments and agencies, the old structure of an annual report will be replaced by information that is more
useful for the public (and more user friendly to read and understand) – data will play a big part in this change of reporting – it will
especially be important for making graphical and interactive content to match the strategic goals and objectives of an
organisation – it will also need to be updated more regularly and the reporting mechanism will be fluid – data will be used to help
not only inform but also highlight important information usually lost in content of a report.
7.7
7.8
Open Data
National Metadata Standards
- Description: Development and adoption by all Australian government jurisdictions (and local governments) of national metadata
standards for key open data categories and spatial data sets to ensure national consistency in publication and improved
accessibility and use for data end users and the public. A key objective should be to enable greater transparency and
comparability of public administration services across the nation.
Identify ways to manage and view sensitive data – not just for security reasons but for a person’s privacy
Open Data
There is comment by Amanda Lawrence posted on the Open Data theme: This theme should be Open Access to Information - or
something similar - not 'open data'. Specifically her item no. 4:collation of data on government activities such as research
projects, donations etc
There will need to be guidance and standards around access of data where the research projects can identify individuals, who,
how and where this data is available will need to be considered carefully (we have been doing some work recently with a
research institute in NSW and the data and statistics they have available could identify individuals if not managed with clear
security access measures)
The USA have identified this in their plan and are looking to “Streamline the Declassification Process”, the Australian NAP will
also need to consider this aspect to ensure national security and privacy issues are not compromised.8.1
8.2
8.2.1
8.2.2
8.3
8.3.1
as well as involving community, there is a wealth of expertise within private-sector that can be brought to government projects -
whether they're at idea or funded stage
Establish a public engagement and collaborative approach to the development, implementation and monitoring of all major
public policies. Establish an education program to support and upskill citizens to better engage with government.
Determine requirements for engagement based on IAP2 standards not a single standard across all public policy processes.
Response to suggested action from participants in IAP2 P2 for OGPAU teleconference 21/3/16
o Like to see a step back to ensuring that the community can be well informed
o Careful with over-engaging, as this will ‘cheapen’ the process of engagement
o That ‘sensible’ costing of these actions is considered
Response to suggested actions from participants at the Ark Community Engagement Conference 22/3/16
Improve the democratisation of public problem solving and government's capability to engage citizens and organisations in
addressing social and governance channges by implementing a whole-of-government challenge platform with agency training
and support methods in order to support government agencies to put out both 'grand challenges' for the design/conceptualisation
of solutions to large problems (ie the design of Canberra and the Opera House) and for small challenges (ie the design of tools
and messages to promote healthy eating by children). This could be strongly based on the US model (www.challenge.gov).
Proposed by Craig Thomler
My intent with this suggestion was to support how government raises, manages and sources potential solutions for policy
challenges with the public, rather than on the side of opening government to citizen-led engagement.
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
As such while a challenge platform could eventually allow for citizen-led challenges, the intent is to provide an alternative and
broader approach for agencies which buttresses some of the flaws in procurement processes by providing a mechanism to
engage on smaller challenges, in non-monetary ways and to attract broader responses and ideas from the community than is
possible in a procurement approach (which only reaches a small subset of entities with potential solutions).
Extending a challenge platform to citizen/industry initiated challenges would be a (distant) future stage, or better managed
through a different process (per the NSW & Vic government approaches or a petition-based approach).
8.3.2
8.3.3
8.4
8.4.1
8.4.2
8.5
8.5.1
8.5.2
8.5.3
8.5.4
8.6
8.6.1
8.6.2
8.6.3
"Establish an open and transparent process to encourage unsolicited proposals from the public, business and industry. This
would enable all levels of business to contribute not only ideas but infrastructure, services, and alternative business models to
support the delivery of public services and infrastructure." leads to 'all lobbying (unsolicited proposals) be required to go through
an open and transparent process, easily accessible by all'.
Yes: 'all lobbying (unsolicited proposals) must be required to go through an open and transparent process, easily accessible by
all'
In support of more direct democracy and broadening the role of citizens in governance outside of the electoral cycle, introduce a
capability for citizens to introduce legislation into parliament for debate and a vote, borrowing from the models introduced
successfully by Estonia and Sweden. This would involve a series of gates that a piece of prospective legislation would have to
meet before being submitted to parliament, including receiving initial support (X supporters online), being framed as legislation
(through the support of a volunteer/part-funded legal capability), being modelled (with the support of the affected portfolio
agencies) and then receiving a level of community support that indicates a significant desire for the legislation (X supporters
online). When it goes to parliament for debate and voting, the votes for, against and abstentions should all be captured and
reported with the legislation for transparency reasons.
There could be a commitment to trial this with a small number of Bills and review within the first National Action Plan period.
How about making sure that people can participate with the open system we have- local MPs, the political system? Response to
suggested actions from participants at the Ark Community Engagement Conference 22/3/16
Commit to a six or eight week public exposure period for all laws before they are voted on by parliament, with a capability for
individuals and groups to propose amendments and identify issues with potential laws before they are put into practice. Ensure
that the exposure occurs in a public manner, potentially with the capability for individuals and organisations to register for alerts
by topic for laws that impact on their lives and activities. Create a review and response mechanism that ensures that all
considerations raised are addressed publicly in plain english such that the rationale behind the purpose and specific wording of
each law are clear to the people it is to be enforced on. Currently the exposure period is quite short and is not well promoted,
thus often laws are passed with little scrutiny and with significant drafting flaws, which are only identified in later implementation
and must be amended over time. The process above would significantly reduce the error rate in legislation and add an extra
consultation step for addressing specific aspects of laws that have not been fully considered in relation to the citizens and
organisations affected.
This needs to be supported by a default requirement for consideration of each Bill by a parliamentary committee which invites
submissions and holds public hearings, as happens in New Zealand and many other parliaments.
Appropriate period of time should be determined by level of impact. Base standards on the IAP2 standard and core values -
including quality assurance standards and timeframes. Formal guidance for Federal Government agencies may need to be
developed. Response to suggested action from participants in IAP2 P2 for OGPAU teleconference 21/3/16
o All laws could be impractical, perhaps a focus on areas of public interest
o Conversation around ‘what do we want to be engaged on?’ e.g. should we be leaving policy around nutrition and food to the
experts to legislate, or do we include the community in something they don’t necessarily have expertise in it
o More thought around timeframe- flexibility.
o Matrix- pt system. Determine point system to create time weighting
Response to suggested actions from participants at the Ark Community Engagement Conference 22/3/16
o Important to seek views of the wider community. Give equal weighting to community views? What happens with vocal groups
that may be the minority gets heard without the consideration of other non-vocal groups
o Mechanism to provide access to information on policy consent
Response to suggested actions from participants at the Ark Community Engagement Conference 22/3/16
To mitigate the current state where agencies all consult citizens to different degrees and via widely different methods, develop
whole of government guidance and consultation capabilities that focuses on evidence-based policy development over Ministerial
fiat. Currently some agencies employ advanced online consultation tools and/or wide-reaching community engagement, while
others employ very basic and opaque techniques, often with consultation methods selected and funded on a project by project
basis with wildly different approaches and techniques for engagement even when similar topics are being considered. A central
capability with clear and public guidance on how and when agencies must engage the public and stakeholders would remove a
great deal of the ability for departments or Ministers to rule by fiat, with limited or 'hidden' consultation (such as burying a white
paper deep in a website, or holding consultation events with a specific limited set of stakeholders unknownst to the broader
community affected by policy changes). This should include a central register of all government public consultations, including
mechanisms for people and organisations to register for alerts for consultations touching on their areas of interest. This
approach would help normalise the consultation process for citizens, who would be able to easily discover consultations on
topics of interest to them from different agencies through a central location, would be able to respond to consultations in a more
standardised and user-friendly way, and would provide support for a broader range of consultation approaches for smaller
agencies that otherwise cannot afford to employ techniques which may be more effective than those they currently use. The
likely end solution would integrate technologies from different consultation providers, as well as custom functionality (which may
be paid for by a group of agencies to share costs) as well as consultation support and training services to ensure that
consultations are designed and executed to deliver effective outcomes. Note that I have witnessed a number of 'wasted'
consultations where the process, response mechanism, or framing approach resulted in limited usable responses - a waste of
public money and potentially politically dangerous where the government receives an inaccurate picture of community views -
addressing this area in the manner outlined would significantly reduce this waste and likely reduce the overall cost of
consultation across the entire government. Proposed by
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Base standards on the IAP2 standard and core values - including quality assurance standards and timeframes
Public Participation
Formal guidance for Federal Government agencies may need to be developed
IAP2 code of ethics - transparency of release really important
Register for alerts - and notify of opportunities
Should it be a whole of Government approach- State and Local included as well?
Not one size fits all - enable space for agencies to pick tools and approaches.
Adopt the National General Assembly of LG - 7 core values of public participation, request Australian Government demonstrate
these
Lift actions to be more general values based
Clarity around terminology - working group
Working group - key people in each Government agency
IAP2 to make a submission
PM&C Director of engagement should lead
Response to suggested action from participants in IAP2 P2 for OGPAU teleconference 21/3/16
Should trial new approaches on pilot projects
o Centralised access to information i.e. what are all the projects happening in my area
Public Participation
o To ensure accessibility through a limited range of platforms/channels (with online and offline)
Response to suggested actions from participants at the Ark Community Engagement Conference 22/3/16
That recognises that diverse publics require different approaches and consideration to support participation, and us underpinned Public Participation
by human rights / social justice principles.
Principles:
• Keep it real, lean and nimble
• What we are learning
• How can we improve
• Are we maintaining our purpose and first principles
Response to suggested actions from participants in Engage2Act unconference on 23/3/168.7 This looks like a good consultation process Pia and Co. It is clear what will happen next and how we might get involved, it’s been Public Participation
well promoted (but I am actively tuned in), there is sufficient time for those interested to consider information presented, there are
multiple methods (and points in the process) to provide input and for Gov to consolidate, respond to and consider it.
I hope we will also see good use of citizen engagement, technology and data to understand social issues / community needs and
refining service delivery; and support the potential in our community to manage public resources. I would also like to see public
participation in the way we deliver, report and monitor delivery of this National Action Plan – not just public reporting.
8.8 D. Public Participation
Public Participation
There are already some ways citizens can contribute to the democratic process.For example, there are opportunities for public
participation in some reviews, audits and parliamentary inquiries. This could easily be expanded.
8.9
Actionable 1:Form a working group to discuss areas in which it would be possible to involve public participation in policy
formulation to build upon those already available.This could be facilitated by opportunities to submit ideas regarding how
technology might assist in increasing public participation as well as any risk management aspects.
Public Participation
Open Source Package for Consultation and Collaboration. There are many open source apps that can be used for both
engagement and collaboration. The quality, interoperability and ease of installation in this area has gone up dramatically.
Australia could lead the way by creating a special, open source technology package that makes deploying and customising
these apps far more accessible to government IT departments. Interoperability with proprietary tools would also be possible. This
would allow innovative engagement and collaboration projects to get off the ground more quickly for less money, with more
connectivity between projects.
This approach solves three critical challenges in the use of online for citizen engagement:
1. Duplication: Government spends too much time procuring and setting up online engagements, and not enough time making
them succeed
2. Dissipation: Government is forced to rebuild their audience for each new consultation, rather than maintaining a base ready-to-
engage citizens who can be proactively invited
3. Fragmentation: Insights from each consultation are stored separately in different data formats, preventing the government
from discovering trends and insights from across all consultations
To support this outcome, we propose foregrounding the principles of open innovation and genuine collaboration, to allow the
Government to continuously improve the platform by:
- Accessing the full range of the nation’s digital innovation talent base, both within and outside government
- Partnering with other governments, both domestically and globally, to add value to the system
Further, we recommend a “community source” solution that uses open source software best practice, supported by strong
collaborative governance to decide the content of the codebase and the software roadmap. We also recommend use of standard
software frameworks such as Ruby on Rails and Django (Python), as well as open data standards, to ensure that all components
of the system are developed in a way that is accessible to a range of providers and participants across the nation. Benefits of
this approach include:
- Avoiding license fees and pay-per-user models that make the system prohibitively expensive as soon as you are successful (ie
at large, national scales)
- Future-proofing the system to enable integration of other open source and proprietary engagement solutions
8.10
People's Food Policy Process for Australia: Since the food system is foundational to all life, and existing and future wellbeing and Public Participation
sustainability, it is imperative that the voices of as many Australians as possible should be heard in developing a coherent, long-
term, fair and sustainable food policy for Australia.
This links very clearly to the pillar of citizen participation, leading in turn to more responsive, innovative and effective governance.
Similarly the development of an authentically participatory process links directly to the two grand challenges prioritised by the
Australian government, i.e. 1) "Improving Public Services" - especially health, education, and water - by fostering public service
improvement or private sector innovation; 2) "More Effectively Managing Public Resources" includes measures that address
budgets, procurement, natural resources and foreign assistance.
An excellent model for a participatory process of engaging with large numbers of citizens in the development of a national food
policy is the People's Food Policy Project of Canada, which produced the ground-breaking report: "Resetting the Table":
http://foodsecurecanada.org/people-food-policy. This was adapted at a smaller scale in Australia in 2012-3 by the Australian
Food Sovereignty Alliance with the development of the People's Food Plan for Australia:
http://www.australianfoodsovereigntyalliance.org/peoples-food-plan/. Earlier participatory policy development processes that had
significant and important outcomes, as well as very well-regarded and transparent processes, were the Purple Sage project -
https://vwt.org.au/1998/11/purple-sage/ - and the WaterMark project - https://vwt.org.au/2007/11/water-mark/ - both led by the
Victorian Women's Trust.
8.11
As a first step, I would encourage the Australian government to endorse the Urban and Regional Food Declaration, which has
been developed by Sustain: The Australian Food Network (www.circlesoffood.org) and can be read here:
http://www.circlesoffood.org/urban-and-regional-food-declaration/. The Declaration has been endorsed by the City of Melbourne,
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council, the City of Ballarat and the City of Greater Geelong, as well as numerous other institutions
and organisations.
Public participation principles: Public participation in government needs clear definition of what ‘government’ is. The Parliament Public Participation
and executive government have been elected to act on behalf the people – they need to be kept accountable and responsible for
their decisions. The administrative arm of government is usually tasked with the research (including community consultation and
engagement), development (including co-design and collaboration) and implementation of policies, services, programs, etc.
Public Participation in each of these two ‘government’ arenas should not have a blanket approach applied.
We need to be sure the differences are articulated and then a set of principles is developed to be applied to each. These
principles should include, at the core, a commitment to open government and public participation and should be underpinned by
a diversity, inclusion and human rights framework.
8.12
A Facebook for Public Participation: Digital platforms have made real time data a reality for many spheres of life but has yet to
Public Participation
find its way into public participation in government, policy and feedback. Rather than invest in yet more out dated surveying
approaches and technologies, we could bring real time data and feedback into selected areas of government. Just imagine if this
Wiki was data powered and visualised, we wouldn't just know that there were 67 comments, we would have breakdowns of
those comments by theme and topic or wordcloud, we could get a sense of the breadth of participation by location, electorate,
demographics etc.
Examples could include using real time data and dashboards to report on:
Management of public resources (budget vs actual)
Public service improvement
Indicators of private sector innovation.
In terms of actions:
1. Narrowly pinpoint a problem worth solving (eg measure the outcomes - not outputs - of the federal Innovation Statement in
terms of fostering private sector innovation)
2. Identify the owner (ie Christopher Pyne)
3. Formulate this as a challenge for the upcoming GovHack event
4. Collaboratively define success indicators and measures (startups AND corporates)
5. Fund/support incubation of an MVP to beta stage.8.13
8.13.1
8.14
8.15
8.16
8.16.1
8.16.2
Public Advisory Panel: Public participation in government should be in public hands.
There should be a peak public organization – called, say, Public Advisory Council (PAC) - which:
• monitors government activities
• maintains a data base of public organizations and individuals with interests in particular issues
• assesses which government activities appear to require public participation
• determines the nature and extent of the participation needed
• advises interested public organizations and individuals about the requirement
• assists organization and individuals in preparing material and participating, particularly those with limited resources
• collects, collates and analyzes material from them
• also, of its own volition, collects, collates and analyzes material including by professionally conducted, reliable and valid
quantitative and qualitative surveys (as advocated by Bob Douglas in his suggestion)
with the use of unprofessional surveys, as currently are prolific and which misrepresent public opinion, being proscribed
• prepares and makes submissions based on that information
• prosecutes the public case with government, opposition and cross-bench Members of Parliament.
The system would not preclude interested organizations and individuals from making their own submissions and representations.
The PAC could also act unilaterally if it identified an activity in which no known public organizations or individuals had an interest.
Advantages would include:
• the potential for a single, powerful submission embracing a wide-range of public opinion, simplifying the task of government.
• resourced-starved Opposition and cross-bench MPs would receive the same powerful submission rather than a collection of
submissions with which they have to deal.
• (One of the first issues the PAC should deal with would be the lack of resources available to Opposition and cross-bench MPs
– democracy would be enhanced if they were to have far greater resources)
• most importantly, public participation would be controlled by a public organization, devoid of government involvement
This would be a major organization which would be:
• financed by government using a fixed formula which guarantees minimum funds
• staffed by a highly-qualified meritocracy of personnel from a multiplicity of disciplines
• have a structure which would enable it to cover all government activities e.g. it could have as many advisory panels as there
are ministerial portfolios.
This suggestion arises from a decade of individual advocacy for greater public/client involvement and benefits in legal regulation,
stemming from being a victim of a major fraud in an Adelaide law firm’s trust accounts.
The fraud exposed the near-monopoly in the development and administration of legal regulatory systems (they are state and
territory responsibilities).
I firmly support this proposal. I have previously published a proposal for a Public Interest Council which, I would argue should
have at least similar if not superior standing to The Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) .The paper is
available as the closing essay in a volume published by Australia21 about public Interest .http://www.australia21.org.au/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/ATT00055.pdf.
All government engagement feedback should be kept in an accessible permanent archive. All comments collected from
government engagement processes could then be accessed in the future becoming a record of the methodology, level of
engagement and the nature of the dialogue. This would become a ongoing testament to the progress of public participation in
Australia as well as a useful archive of comments on important issues through history.
All government agencies across all levels should be able to run their own engagement programs, using their own methods, with
their own tools, in their own time. This means providing guidance, principles and support to government rather than rules and
regulations (beyond jointly agreed minimum standards).
As per my comment on the Engagement theme, it is vital that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and organisation are
engaged through all stages of the process. There are numerous issues and concerns about the large amount of data collected
by various government departments and who owns the data. There has also been concerns about how data has been used
against us in the past.
There should be a seperate engagement with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and organisations to give adequate
consideration to our issues and concerns.
The key to good engagement is to involve those affected in the development and design of the engagement process. For
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, people from a Non English Speaking Background, people with intellectual or
physical disabilities, children, youth, seniors and other people - all should have the opportunity for input into the engagement
process for whatever the project or activity may be.
Posting a couple of relevant documents to this for future reference:
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Engagement with Indigenous communities in key sectors, Resource sheet no. 23 produced for the Closing the Gap
Clearinghouse
http://www.aihw.gov.au/uploadedFiles/ClosingTheGap/Content/Publications/2013/ctgc-rs23.pdf
8.17
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2014. Developing the National Early Childhood
Development Researchable Data Set. Cat. no. PHE 179. Canberra: AIHW.
http://www.aihw.gov.au/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id=60129549617
Statistical publications are the bedrock of evidence based policy. Public participation in the commission and classification of
these publications is needed to make data collection legitimate and to make the statistics more informative and consensual.
Public Participation
Deliverables:
Contracting: To create a fund and trial participatory budgeting of representative surveys and statistical reports on social groups
that petition for this information..
Creating:To hold randomly selected juries to decide upon issues in the australian standard classifications of census groups. For
example, the Australian Standard Classification of Religious Groups.
Publishing: To provide and monitor discussion fora on each of the method papers, classification descriptions, and statistical
reports that are on the australian bureau of statistics website.
Publishing:To provide information on how and why the report was commissioned whether it was for operational purposes, in
response to a department, minister or parliamentarian, or whether it was part of the participatory budgeting process requested by
citizens.
8.18
I recently read the unflinching external review report on the DTO's Gov.au "alpha" release
[www.dto.gov.au/standard/assessments/gov-au-alpha/] and it made me wonder what would happen if we applied the discipline
and structure of good digital asset design - in this case, rebuilding the federal government's web front end - to the business of
policy making.
Public Participation
The question forms part of a longer standing speculation about the relative lack of progress we've witnessed in the application of
the tools, culture and practice of "digital transformation", which have mostly been used in a service delivery context, to the way
we conceive of, and execute, the policy process.
By and large, the deeper reaches of the policy world have been relatively "transformation free", at least in the sense we've
witnessed how the mantra of digital disruption has upset many of the instincts and habits of work in other part of the public
sector. That has been the result, I think of a mix of pragmatism (start at the relatively easy end of the spectrum with service
delivery) and more or less stout resistance from those anxious, for a whole range of reasons, to preserve and entrench the
inviolability, and even elements of the mystery of their work.
What struck me about the external review report, written by reviewers from the UK's Government Digital Service (on which the
Australia DTO has been closely and deliberately modelled), is the combination of three factors which framed the task of
designing and implementing a digital service or asset.
The first factor is an agreed, accessible and authoritative basis of design 'rules' and principles that define the context and
process of design, build and implementation; in this case, the whole process is governed by the DTO's design rules.
The Digital Service Standard [www.dto.gov.au/standard] consists of 14 principles or criteria against which all digital design and
delivery should be judged. Their purpose is simple:
The Digital Service Standard establishes the criteria that Australian Government digital services must meet to ensure our
services are simpler, faster and easier to use. Meeting the criteria means we can consistently provide high quality services and
satisfy our users’ needs.
Some of the criteria include "understand user needs", "...use an agile and user-centred approach," "measure user satisfaction
and... measure and report other metrics publicly" and "make sure the service is simple enough that users success first time
unaided."
8.18.1
The second factor is an open process of external review designed to hold the people doing the actual work to account. But,
although the approach can be tough and uncompromising, it doesn’t appear to be undertaken in a traditional "audit" mode which
Now That's a Grand Challenge and a half, one that requires a big shift in culture which at present prefers closed rather than
Public Participation
open processes.
Peter Shergold's recent report wants stronger protections for public service thinking, John Lloyd describes FOI as "very
pernicious' and John Fraser said the important stuff doesn't get written down these days. Such a culture change needs constant
leadership from the top and reinstatement and funding support for the watchdog and advocate of open government, the Office of
Australian Information Commissioner, an office the government still maintains should be abolished despite the fact a majority in
the Senate opposes the necessary legislation to achieve this.8.19
Provide a way for citizens to easily engage electronically with government agencies. To engage with citizens government
agencies needs ways to know who they are talking to. Another way of expressing it is that citizens need ways to tell agencies
who they are.
There are two general approaches to identification. One approach is the single identity approach. This is often called single
signon.
Public Participation
The alternative approach is to take advantage of existing identity systems. This approach gives citizens ways to link their existing
identities. Using this approach a citizen can identify themselves to an agency. Once identified with one agency the citizen can
reuse their identity with other agencies.
This approach leaves data in data silos. It protects data through the use of approved applications. It provides a private secure
identity system. It requires no new legislation or regulations. It is low cost. The system is agnostic to who owns the data silos.
This means it integrates with civil society and with private industry identity systems.
An action item for OGPau is to.
Trial a system where citizens have access to information about themselves in existing systems. Citizens verify their identities
each time they engage with an agency. A citizen's online identity is the combination of all existing identities.
(note privacy principle 12.4b states that an organization holding data about a person should: "give access to the information in
the manner requested by the individual, if it is reasonable and practicable to do so".)
Once a person has a connection with two agencies the person can copy data from one agency to the other. The trial system will
do this for any task requiring the reuse of personal information. There are hundreds of potential trial situations.
The savings generated from the first implementations can fund implementations for other applications. The government will only
need to seed fund the first application.
Advertise to agencies whether they would like to participate in an innovation trial on sharing personal data across agencies.
8.19.1
An alternative to this action item that achieves the same purpose.
Public Participation
For Open Government to work we need citizen engagement. The mechanics of engagement matters. Personal data in
government systems are in self contained data silos. Taxation data is separate from Health data which is separate from Law
Enforcement etc. For a meaningful engagement with citizens it is important to maintain these silos.
The Australia Card and other national id proposals were attempts to link data silos. The reasons to do this were claims of
efficiency of administration. But, when we hard link personal data silos the efficiencies prove to be imaginary. This happens
because the functions performed within the data silos interact. These interactions make it difficult for each individual system to
change and adapt. The interactions increase costs that soon overwhelm any savings.
In Australia the latest attempts to integrate data silos are mygov and ehealth. Both have proved to be expensive and have
increased costs. This has happened because both use the same identity across personal data silos. This creates a hard link
across silos. A hard link is when something about a person changes in one silo it changes in the other silo.
Both mygov and ehealth are being overhauled. These attempts will have limited success. The reason is that the overhauls
continue to use a common identity.
The alternative to using a common identity is to continue to use different identities for different data silos. To communicate
across silos we link common data across data silos. But we do it without using a common identity. This is a weak link because
changing data in one silo may not change it in other silos.
Open Government initiatives will fail if citizen engagement uses one identity for all engagement. The Open Government
movement should use different identities for different engagements. It is important to maintain personal data silos for different
government services.
A possible action item for Open Government is.
8.20
8.21
Open Government engagement uses different personal identities for different types of engagement.
In the book Bringing Citizens Voices to the Table by Carolyn Lukensmeyer she says that:
Public Participation
"This book has a very specific objective: to see our nation’s practice of democracy reflect the aspirations for self-governance that
were embedded in our founding documents; to actually be a governing system “of the people, by the people, for the people.”We
must have systems and mechanisms in place to achieve that goal. So, as we call on citizens, decision makers, and our federal
government to adopt new citizen engagement practices, we must simultaneously commit to building the infrastructure that will
support those efforts. Together, new practices and underlying supports can generate a strong, reinforcing pattern of authentic
democratic behavior. " Carolyn's book outlines seven requirements:
A legislative mandate for participation
Safe, accessible physical spaces
Broader access to technology
A facilitation infrastructure
An organizational infrastructure
A trustworthy, fact-based media
Robust civic education
Perhaps we need to consider what this infrastructure looks like now, identify where is already exists and then build on this as
part of a National Action Plan
An easy way to find and read summaries of Agreements made by the Australian Government with major global institutions (e.g., Public Participation
the United Nations). In each agreement summary a clear statement in the Introduction that outlines which Government policy/ies,
department/s or authority/ies are responsible for its application and ways citizens can to access the original and complete
Agreement.
To expand awareness and use of such valuable information by Community groups, Local, State and Federal Governments and
the Private sector. A seven step process can begin:
-Update/Introduce Government, community and private sector leaders to the Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its Multi-stakeholder partnership process https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdinaction
-Announce who is the Australian representative at the next UN High-level Political Forum of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 11 - 20 July 2016, New York and provide a Briefing package to civil society organisations, the media, the private
sector and government institutions, e.g., https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/majorgroups/national-capacity-building
see Preparing for action: Post-2015 national briefing package and Preparing for Action: Post-2015 National Briefings Explanatory
Note
-Provide Local Government Libraries easy access to the SDGs promotion resources
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdinaction/publications
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdinaction/meetings
- Notifying (regularly - twice a year) all Regional Development groups with updates on ways to take actions, and case studies of
best practice, to meet the SDGs
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdinaction/documents
- Introduce Business and Community Awards for progressing SDGs and achieving innovative outcomes
- Integrate via the Open Government Partnership infrastructure the Australian activities related to SDGs and six monthly reports
on policy/ies, department/s or authority/ies actions to reach SDG goals. Thes Activities and Actions are reported to Australian
local communities, the United Nations and Federal Parliament annually.
8.21.1
A current and important example
World leaders on 25 September 2015 at the United Nations, adopted the Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (A/RES/70/1), which includes a set of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to end poverty, fight
inequality and injustice, and tackle climate change by 2030. The SDGs enable integration of multiple previous Agreements
regarding People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnerships (https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs). There is a vast
resource of evidence-based methods to achieve SDGs available through the United Nations
(https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/topics/capacity-building) and examples of Government bodies incorporating the SDGs in
How could this action add to the Australian Treaties Library website?
Public Participation8.22
Management of data collected though engagement - 'invited data': Establish systems, protocols and procedures to ensure that
Public Participation
data collected through citizen, community and stakeholder engagement can be shared across agencies while ensuring privacy is
retained.
Having a centralised system to track and coordinate engagement activities and enable the sharing of data collected across
agencies and projects will also make the time and money invested into participation in engagement more efficient for both
stakeholders and government. It will enable greater coordination when addressing social issues, measure and monitoring social
impacts and outcomes, and refine services and programs.
These systems and processes need to be designed with respect to privacy, enabling consent and self-service and by
segregating data and user access, but they are essential if we want to build on existing data, understand trade offs and impacts,
and work together more effectively to address complex problems. They enable participation beyond consultation and are
necessary for collaboration - across agencies and with parties outside of Government.
8.23
Systems implemented will need to enable the analysis and reporting of both qualitative and quantitative data, AND support
communications and the management of relationships generated through engagement. Agencies will need to work together to
determine appropriate reporting metrics, taxonomies and user access.
A three yearly, publicy commissioned and funded, statistically valid random survey of voters in every electorate, to assess
Public Participation
satisfaction and experience of open democracy and identify concerns. Currently, the polling of the Australian population about
their concerns and aspirations is undertaken by political parties, media groups and those with a particular axe to grind.
Many of us have our own view about why the Australian electorate is currently disenchanted with our democracy but we lack the
essential data, based on neutrally funded and neutrally conducted, comprehensive, systematic surveys.
I propose that the Commonwealth Electoral Commission, should, every three years, commission a statistically valid random
sample of voters from each Australian electorate to be interviewed using an interview schedule, which asks open questions
about general life satisfaction, work/life balance, childcare, employment opportunities, education opportunities, health care
experience, political representation, views on the environment, defence policy and spending, levels of taxation, housing
opportunities, transport infrastructure, community engagement, sense of security, the role of government and the private sector
and the basic assumptions underpinning the operation of the economy.
The results of this survey should be made available to every voter, in the period that precedes the subsequent federal election.
We all accept our responsibility to be counted in the census. I suspect that most Australians would similarly welcome the
possibility of providing their views in this way as their contribution to open government.
8.23.1 I wanted to say how much I like this idea proposed by Bob Douglas. Given that it is coming up to Census season, the idea that
rather than treat Australians as passive recipients of policies derived from a mandatory survey like the Census (the design of
which it would appear Australians have very little say), an alternative/complimentary survey that actually asks Australians what
they want and are concerned about seems more in line with policy co-creation and principles of the OGP. Public Participation
8.24 Public Participation around complex subjects: There has been good progress in bi-directional communication between citizens
and government. There are now excellent tools to run YES/NO polls past many people to gauge community sentiment.
A challenge worth tackling is how to enable public debate and evidence based decisions on complex topics - such as Climate
Change. Complex systems require significant time to understand, which makes them susceptible to misdirected influence from
vested interest groups. Questions to consider:
Who will fund "trusted experts" to research and advise on complex issues so they can make informed decisions?
How can a community vote on complex subjects?
How do you address the signal-to-noise ratio within community discussions? Public Participation
More discussion here: http://cameronshorter.blogspot.com.au/2016/03/open-government-lessons-from-open.html
8.25 Always-on community listening: Initiate an always-on program of listening to the community, using both digital and face to face
methods of community listening and engagement. E.g. Using social media monitoring and other analytics tools, map key
concerns and pain points of community members to geographic data; use this data to underpin ongoing conversations and
workshops with local communities that are focused on their needs and concerns first, not the priorities of policy-makers.
8.26 Enable full and equitable participation in new policies and programs. This could be achieved by bringing together broad and
Public Participation
diverse groups from across civil society to form a panel whose remit was to interpret, evaluate, and in some cases paraphrase
new policies and programs. Thereby enabling deeper understanding and broader civic engagement across the community. This
would result in the Australian public being better placed to make important decisions around the policies and programs that
affect them.
Summary of public participation teleconference 30/3/16. Nine people attended: Alvaro, Leanne, Ken, Bob, Ash, Marcus, Kevin,
Public Participation
Rosie and I. Bob spoke to his suggestion of a national survey and at the start of the call the group touched on the differences
between actions suggested and participatory, representative and deliberative methods to engage / increase participation. This
group felt that before talking about methods and suggested actions, the Federal Government should declare a commitment to
increase public participation and define principles that could be applied / demonstrated by agencies. They worked together to
shape up this commitment statement: "We value the wisdom of members of our community and will create diverse opportunities
for them to work on issues that affect our communities." When shaping up this statement the group briefly spoke about culture,
public servants as citizens, that not all residents are citizens, and that public participation should be then having a say. Potential
lead agencies discussed included the DTO, PM&C, Public Service Commission and the role of the Governor General. The group
felt that PM&C should lead this commitment and work with agencies to deliver the first action / define principles for public
participation, and that agencies could then deliver some of the actions suggested to demonstrate commitment progress and
reporting against principles. Milestones / actions under the commitment could include the digital, participatory, deliberative,
representative methods to increase participation suggested under this theme. Amelia
8.27
8.28
Public Participation
Australian Wisdom Network ( www.wisdom.to/australia ) : The Zero Marginal Cost path to Society Growth, universal public
Public Participation
participation, democratisation of every sector and economic/government transformation. "Today, the main contradiction in
modern capitalism is between the possibility of free, abundant socially produced goods, and a system of monopolies, banks, and
governments struggling to maintain control over power and information .... Everything is pervaded by a fight between network
and hierarchy. Paul Mason"
'You never change things by fighting the existing reality. To change something, build a new model that makes the existing model
obsolete' R. Buckminster Fuller.
The Australian Wisdom Network ( www.wisdom.to/australia ) is a new model based upon Zero Marginal Cost Network to crowd
create economic transformation, government transformation and Network Society and achieve Society Growth for all Australians.
Australian Wisdom Network applies the Network Society development model to deliver the "1 Australia in 1 Global Village"
objectives of 'Society Growth', Minimum Life (enhanced Basic Income, Economic Transformation, Government Transformation
and to accelerate the evolutionary Shift from Industrial Economy to Network Society. Zero Marginal Cost Networks (internet,
massively scalable 'blockchainified' databases, wisdom networks, mobile devices, distributed apps, distributed databases, open
source software etc) and the resulting Network Society development model offer a superior, efficient, effective global and
costless means to organise society (sectors, countries and the Global Village) and focus community wisdom on society
outcomes and a Minimum Life (enhanced 'Basic Income') for everyone.
If Australians sat down with a blank sheet of paper today, this is the 'Australia' they would design for tomorrow. It is a quick, easy
and comprehensive paradigm (or platform) shift using current technologies. Simply, every 'thing' in every sector across society
has a virtual representation in a society-wide, blockchainified, massively scalable databases accessible to everyone. Wisdom
Networks organise and focus the wisdom of crowds around every 'thing' in society, everywhere for everyone via mobile devices.
The outcome is a real-time, Zero Marginal Cost, transparent and accessible Network Society that delivers a Third Industrial
Revolution jump in productivity and quality of life for everyone. The crowd can begin with a small problem and expand to sector,
country, region and the Global Village.
Australian Wisdom enables the 3rd Industrial Revolution, distributed prosperity, distributed governance, economic
transformation, government transformation, all-inclusive citizen empowerment, democratisation across every sector,
regional/global integration, regional integration and accelerates the shift towards a Network Society and a global humanitarian
platform.8.28.1
Comment on the ideal organisation to deploy was also requested.
Public Participation
The ideal organisation to deploy Australia Wisdom (within government) would be the Digital Transformation Office.
Approximately, 30 people would be required and it would cost a few million dollars. In its current form, the DTO is a service
provider to other government departments. Other government departments still make the decisions as to the degree of
transformation that the DTO can enable.
The DTO may need to follow the Malaysian model and be given statutory powers to implement Australian Wisdom across
government. A discussion of the Australian vs Malaysian approaches is provided in the article 'What is Transformation? 4
Purposes of Government ‘Transformation’ departments (theatre, advisory, incremental, metamorphosis). Examples: Australia,
Malaysia' at http://www.wisdom.to/transformation.html .
In fact, Australian Wisdom can operate independently of government. It can be launched and the people use it directly to
manage their 'things' across sectors in society (health, education, equity market, innovation, governance, government etc).
People can add their 'things'. Australian Wisdom can also scrape things from the internet.
8.28.2
Deployment and direct benefit to citizens is not conditional upon government involvement. However, it is appropriate for
government to implement Australian Wisdom society wide. Government defines the rules of society and has a significant impact
on structure. It can legislate the stump jump plough (Industrial Economy) or the Combine Harvester (Network Society). Perhaps,
the time is right to structure society as networks given the recent drive to transform Australia. Government could transform
Australia very quickly. It will take decades for undercapitalised entrepreneurs to achieve the same outcome using a bottom up
approach.
Public Participation
There is another deployment option that may be more appropriate given the responsibility for Society is divided across
government departments (at federal, State and local levels). It may be simpler to just have one organisation like the DTO that
launches one network and make it directly available to all Australian citizens. However, it could also be done incrementally by
individual government departments. A Wisdom Network could be downloaded by anybody in Australia (just like Wordpress for
web sites) and deployed by the smallest or largest communities with a common interest. These individual communities then
mesh into the larger Australian Wisdom over time.
In this comment, we'll introduce an Australian people-driven society, provide a quick sector overview and then provide specific
wisdom networks that could be launched by various Australian government departments. Any of these could spawn or be part of
the Australian Wisdom Network. Without proactive action by Australian government, it will take decades for undercapitalised
Australian entrepreneurs and citizens to achieve the Network Society. With proactive action by the Australian government,
Australia could accelerate the inevitable evolution from Industrial Economy to Network Society and usher in a new era of
prosperity.
Society Growth is people driven by real-time citizen demand (citizen participation and contribution) in wisdom networks across
society
SOCIETY GROWTH IS PEOPLE DRIVEN BY REAL-TIME CITIZEN DEMAND (CITIZEN PARTICIPATION AND
CONTRIBUTION) IN WISDOM NETWORKS ACROSS SOCIETY
The 'Industrial Economy' model for determining '(economic) growth' is planned and expanded by government and industry which
organises money, infrastructure, hierarchy, centralised decision making, annual planning cycles and markets to determine
society focus and expansion. The people in a Network Society drive Society Growth with real-time knowledge, planning, effort
and broad consensus captured and applied in all 'Community of Common Interest' wisdom networks across society. Priorities,
effort and outcomes are determined by real-time citizen activity across society in real-time networks.
8.28.3
8.29
8.30
8.30.1
Any individual could download and deploy a wisdom network in 90-180 days to focus wisdom to focus local, national or global
wisdom on community of common interest, society problem, need or challenge. Society Growth is dynamically with real-time
citizen demand for network features, sector, country, regional and global networks satisfied by any individual creating a wisdom
network in 90-180 days.
Entrepreneurs, governments, telcos and industry build a supply of wisdom networks that present the people and society with
opportunity for Society Growth. Wisdom Network demand (citizen participation and contribution) determines where society
expands by prioritising features, functions, wisdom and effort amongst competing local, sector, country and global networks.
The 3 parts of this discussion have been consolidated into the article "Our submission to the Open Government Partnership
(OGP) team in the Australian Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet ... includes departmental recommendations" at
http://www.wisdom.to/ogpau . This articles may provide some formatting, extra images, and an Appendix of selected extracts
from the Australian Wisdom page ( http://www.wisdom.to/australia ).
Governments should be required to summarise in writing, with data, the reasons for what they are doing across as many areas
as possible - Government should not be "secret politician business". This would impose a discipline on the Government and
allow more people to engage in an informed way about Government decisions. We would be equipped to question our elected
representatives about what they believe in relation to specific issues that they have voted in favour of as a matter of
accountability and responsibility to us. When Governments enact legislation, they set their own goals re that eg compliance with
Human Rights Act or "financial implications". It would become a way of reflecting afterwards and ensuring they understood what
they were doing and why BEFORE hand!
Particiatory budgeting to allocate grant funding: Enable public participation in the allocation of funds to non-government
organisations through the use of participatory budgeting techniques. This would not only open government though public
participation and increased the transparency of these processes, it would also help to ensure that funds available are being
allocated to deliver public services and programs that the community value.
Note that this can be implemented in several ways.
1) Allocating a budget that community organisations could bid for, with a public assessment process and some form of voting on
which grants are provisioned. This may need the establishment of a platform for civic bidding (several open source ones exist),
which could be extended for state and local governments as a central capacity.
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation
2) Pursuing a co-funding approach whereby agencies partner with a crowdfunding platform and nominate a program area.
Prospective grant recipients put their projects on the crowdfunding platform and must raise a certain proportion of their needed
funds from the public, at which point the government will provide a proportion. This approach has been used successfully by both
the Tasmanian and WA governments in the last few years. it requires less infrastructure provision by government and mitigates
some risk by demonstrating community support for the specific programs (through community crowdfunding dollars raised).
3) Providing funds to a third-party organisation which then manages the community-based participatory budgeting process. This
approach allows a specialist to manage the voting process and provides independence from government political processes to
create a perceptually fairer process and allows more expertise to be engaged in supporting the voting process (which is
important as the public is not commonly used to this approach). It does require careful selection of the third-party to ensure
perceptions of bias are minimised.
8.30.2
8.30.3 CORRECTION: Participatory budgeting relies on deliberation for its success. I.e. "Voting" (if required) is the end stage of a long Public Participation
process which draws people into exchanging views, values and ideas, better understanding each other and leading to better
developed policy, which may be agreed by consensus. There is now a wealth of experience of how to make this work well and
flaws to avoid.
A good starting point would be to require Federal MPs to use participatory budgeting techniques to decide on projects to be
funded under the "Stronger Communities Programme" ($150,000 per MP)
Public Participation
Thanks Craig and Ken, I love the way you have built on this suggestion. My vision is similar to the one I outlined for unsolicited
proposals. A combination between participatory and deliberative methods. That the allocation of funds be determined by three
levels of public participation: 1) public pitching / crowd sourcing of ideas or solutions (participatory and inclusive); 2) public
prioritisation through voting and discussion forums online using a set of criteria by a representative sample of the population
(representative - could be a jury); and 3) that the funds be issued by a citizens jury who cross checks the criteria against options
and reports back to the community. I don't mind the idea of crowdfunding as a way of boosting ideas / pitches - I think this should
be optional rather than a necessary part of the process.
8.31 Create a working group to devise better means of public participation. D. Public Participation
Public Participation
There are already some ways citizens can contribute to the democratic process. For example, there are opportunities for public
participation in some reviews, audits and parliamentary inquiries. This could easily be expanded.
8.31.1
8.31.2
8.31.3
Actionable 1: Form a working group to discuss areas in which it would be possible to involve public participation in policy
formulation to build upon those already available. This could be facilitated by opportunities to submit ideas regarding how
technology might assist in increasing public participation as well as any risk management aspects.
I have an action orientation and would need to see a clear framework under which this working group would be committed to
actual outcomes, not simply a report. Talk is easier than doing and it is preferable to pilot several different ideas cheaply than to
talk them out in a smaller circle of participants.
As Evelyn says, there are a range of ways in use; It is a matter of being familiar with them and selecting the best for each
particular matter. The newDemocracy Foundation <newdemocracy.com.au/> is one of several good sources.
o Lack of measure- how to evaluate and communicate the effectiveness of the changes
o Deliberate process- citizen juries/reference groups
o Technology needs to offer a great user experience- e.g. no point offering a portal for submissions if ‘citizens’ are not able to
submit successfully
Response to suggested actions from participants at the Ark Community Engagement Conference 22/3/16
Public Participation
Public Participation
Public Participation8.32
Adopt IAP2 principles and standards for engagement practice: The International Association for Public Participation (IAP2) is the Public Participation
peak body representing engagement professionals around the world. A number of key principles have been developed globally
that are recognised as best practice for engagement and public participation. IAP2 Australasia, is Australia and New Zealand’s
leading Association advancing the practice of public participation.
IAP2 was founded on the belief that those who are affected by decisions have the right to be involved in the decision making
process. Since 1998, IAP2 Australasia have been supporting people who implement public decision making processes by
offering training and resources and promoting the principles of community and stakeholder engagement.
We are well known for our Core Values, Code of Ethics for practitioners and the Public Participation Spectrum. In 2014 it was
recognised that the practice was changing and expanding to include community-led engagement and new tools and training
have been developed to meet this need. The communities of Australia want to have their voice heard more than just at election
time. IAP2 Australasia supports OGP in Australia for this reason and encourages all levels of government, and the private and
not-for-profit sectors, to embed engagement principles into the fabric of decision making processes.
Most recently IAP2 globally released the Quality Assurance Standard for community and stakeholder engagement, which can be
used to measure any community engagement process. We encourage any actions under OGP to consider and implement this
standard as the base or foundation framework. http://www.iap2.org.au/resources/quality-assurance-standard
IAP2 Australasia defines community and stakeholder engagement as a planned process with the specific purpose of working
across organisations, stakeholders and communities to shape decisions or actions in relation to a problem, opportunity or
outcome.
IAP2's core values define the expectations and aspirations of the public participation process - all 7 must be considered in any
engagement process. They can be found on Page 10 of the Standards above. Engagement practitioners agree to uphold these
values and code of ethics (page 9). Across Australia we are seeing a significant increase in government agencies agreeing to
these principles and undertaking training to ensure they can put these into practice.
8.4
8.5
8.6
The IAP2 Public Participation spectrum provides a quick reference to the levels of community engagement available to adopt. It
recognises that not every project will require intense collaboration and some will require more than information delivery. It is
about selecting the right level based on the needs/constraints of the decision maker and the potential impacts on stakeholders.
Though the Spectrum is presented as linear it is not designed to indicate that you should move along the Spectrum. Each
Action: Public participation champions
Public Participation
- Description: Conduct a brief review of successful government public participation activities to identify necessary and desired
skills and capabilities of high-performing communities. Key community representatives (members of the public not engagement
specialists) to be identified as champions for local areas to work with governments to raise awareness and build community
capability in engaging effectively with government. Additionally, governments would be encouraged to disseminate information
internally to build a partnership approach.
Public participation
Public Participation
- Action: Public participation champions
- Description: Conduct a brief review of successful government public participation activities to identify necessary and desired
skills and capabilities of high-performing communities. Key community representatives (members of the public not engagement
specialists) to be identified as champions for local areas to work with governments to raise awareness and build community
capability in engaging effectively with government. Additionally, governments would be encouraged to disseminate information
internally to build a partnership approach.
To open up government the Australian Government should embed in legislation a clear and defined process for use of randomly Public Participation
selected citizens to inform decision making around trade-offs, strategic planning, major policy initiatives or challenges where
there are a divergence of views and potential solutions.
This should be specifically applicable in areas where subjectivity (therefore distrust or fear of corruption) is a large factor.
This would improve the way Australia engages the full spectrum of its population in contentious issues, ensuring greater
transparency by increasing public participation.
This recommendation would provide a legislative platform for use of what are known as Citizens’ Juries. These juries are an
innovative means of involving everyday people in the process of government decision- making and are genuinely pioneering,
with each one acting as a practical example of open government in operation. Legislating for their use would enshrine the right of
citizens to deliberate on issues of real import; and would set a global benchmark for transparent and trust in government thereby
doing much to combat the cynicism and suspicion that is so prevalent in modern democracies.9.1 Establish or support ongoing spaces // events for industry, community and government to come together and work on solving
Public Service Delivery
civic issues i.e. building civic technology, making budget data more accessible or testing viability of new technologies or
programs in government. Something like this: http://www.meetup.com/Civic-Lab-Melbourne/events/228102061/
Mechanisms to monitor and track progress: no. of gov, community and private sector participation, no. issues worked on, no. of
technology developed, no. of people learning new skills i.e. visualising data, no. challenges government puts forward to the
community
What organisations would be best placed to implement the idea: Code for Australia has been running a program to do this exact
thing in Melbourne. A similar space in other capital cities could be great.
9.1.1
9.1.2 Could be implemented in cooperation with civic societies or universities
Open Data Institute in the UK has run a highly successful challenge series, whereby social/economic/environmental challenges
are solved. Building on Code for Australia's idea, this is something that could be achieved locally in Australia
The link I created to the Open Data Challenge Series as mentioned above appears to have disappeared. Here it is:
http://theodi.org/opendatachallengeseries.
It is often the case with many commonwealth and state government departments that customer service officers are not familiar
with their line of work, which in turn is an impediment to the efficient delivery of services. Lack of training may be one of the
causes. Pure incompetence may be another. In any case, this situation needs to be improved, not least because some of those
who are affected wouldn't even know they are! (ie. they are compelled to believe what they are told). Any ideas on how this
might be translated into an actionable and measurable commitment would be welcome.
Keeping and building on ‘corporate memory’
OGP Commitment activity suggestion
Need: Keeping and building on ‘corporate memory’
Activity to meet this need
Formal requirement for government staff, five years from retirement, to mentor younger employees for 12 months. Agreement of
the organisation, retiring employee and the younger employee that ‘shadowing’ is an important work task of both employees and
a formal part of their professional development. The basic process is below and this is expected to evolve through individual and
organisation involvement and need.
1. 'Shadow' a senior government employee (who has more than 15 years of government work experience) with the senior
employee purposefully showing and explaining their most valuable work tools and likely barriers;
2. Attend structured meetings to learn from the senior employees long-term lived experience of developing positive work
relationships, dealing with intricate organisational knowledge, managing transitions and agile change.
9.1.3
9.2
9.3
Public Service Delivery
Public Service Delivery
Public Service Delivery
Public Service Delivery
Public Service Delivery
How it works
The mentoring program has rules and requirements similar to staff training but the content is the lived experience of the senior
staff member's work history. Particularly the technological, social, political, work/home balance and economic capital useful in
enabling more efficient organisation policies, plans and processes. This activity also refines career path planning and
professional development decisions. I strongly suggest that more places for females and minority groups be allocated to this
program to increase government staff diversity.
The benefit to the senior mentor includes reflecting upon new insights, perspectives, information offered by the younger person.
Noting when their work and life experiences are of benefit and can improve current and planned projects. Also, as the senior
employee retires, the organisation may decide to contract the retired person to ‘soft mentor’ senior executives.
Monitor and evaluate
Such employee interaction needs to be a work duty with details of how selection of mentor/mentee occurs, how work is planned
with privacy/confidentiality clauses, the means to review progress and ways to stop the interaction when required. Reporting on
the process is required at 3 month intervals. A common report is prepared as well as individual reports. Work completed during
these interactions will carry both people's names for transparent recognition and appraisal. An employee who has observed the
interactions is also required to evaluate the benefits, challenges and problems at 6 and 12 months.
9.4
Public Service Delivery
This comment is provided by the National Archives of Australia (the National Archives). The National Archives was established
by the Archives Act 1983 as an executive agency of the Australian Government, although it has existed in various forms since
the 1940s. The National Archives is the lead agency for ensuring transparency and accountability in government through its
legislated role of setting records and information management requirements for Australian Government agencies, and preserving
and providing a public right of access to government information.
Open government increases the transparency and accountability of government, encourages greater public engagement,
strengthens governance and improves public service delivery. The National Archives plays a key role in open government by
promoting the creation, management and preservation of authentic, reliable and usable Commonwealth information, and
facilitating access to this information.
The Archives Act 1983 provides a broad definition of records and effectively covers all information created, used or received in
the course of Commonwealth business. Under the Archives Act 1983 (Cth) (Archives Act), the National Archives:
•identifies the archival resources of the Commonwealth;
•preserves and makes the archival resources of the Commonwealth accessible;
•oversees Commonwealth records management;
•determines standards and provides advice to Commonwealth agencies; and
•imposes recordkeeping obligations in respect of Commonwealth records.
Ready access to this information is vital for maintaining the transparency of the democratic process and the accountability of
successive governments, and is integral to a successful open government policy. It is from this perspective and with this
legislated role that the National Archives provides the following observations and comments on the Vision and the framework for
the National Action Plan.
9.5
9.6
Vision
The National Archives supports a Vision that commits to the improved management of, and accessibility to, information and
records. A key element of this is a move to fully digital information management and business processes across the Australian
government sector. This aligns with key commitments identified in the National Action Plans of the United States, Canada and
the United Kingdom. It also aligns with the example Vision statement provided that ‘Open government in the 21st century needs
to translate to digital processes and reporting to improve transparency and accountability’. This has already been achieved by a
number of initiatives which the National Archives is currently leading including earlier access to government records, the Digital
Continuity 2020 Policy, an end-to-end solution to manage digital government information, and modernisation of the Archives Act.
Improve natural resources data publishing and reporting.
Public Service Delivery
Towards equality and fairness in service delivery by the Department of Immigration and Border Protection: LEAD AGENCY:
Public Service Delivery
Department of Immigration and Border Protection
ISSUE TO BE ADDRESSED
The DIBP employs personnel at key decision making positions without sufficient mandatory training/ professional
development(1), and are left to perform their duties according to their own ideas, opinions and value systems.
MAIN OBJECTIVE
1. Clearly define all aspects of each decision making process and set clear guidelines.
2. Provide comprehensive training for ALL case officers (including junior case officers) and make CPD mandatory for all decision-
makers.
3. Routinely test decision-makers’ knowledge in order to maintain a satisfactory standard.
4. Encourage the use of support mechanisms (eg: Citizenship Helpdesk) when in doubt.
OGP CHALLENGE ADDRESSED
IMPROVING PUBLIC SERVICES
RELEVANT TO THE ADVANCEMENT OF
TRANSPARENCY, ACCOUNTABILITY, PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
MILESTONES
{TO BE FURTHER DISCUSSED}
REFERENCE
1. Administering the Character Requirements of the Australian Citizenship Act 2007
http://www.anao.gov.au/Publications/Audit-Reports/2010-2011/Administering-the-Character-Requirements-of-the-Australian-
Citizenship-Act-20079.7
PIAC - Recommendation regarding public service delivery: The following recommendations are drawn from the submission of
the Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) to this consultation. Many of these related to the pro-disclosure and release of
information that would assist in improving public service delivery:
Public Service Delivery
- PIAC recommends that a national consultation be undertaken to identify nationally significant datasets that should be prioritised
for public release. (Recommendation 6)
- PIAC recommends that the Commonwealth Government should consult with the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission, the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the insurance industry, consumer advocates and lawyers to identify
opportunities to make available actuarial and statistical data relating to mental illness. (Recommendation 7)
- PIAC recommends that that Council Of Australian Government Energy Council require that energy retailers report the
emissions intensity of all energy sales they enter into within the National Energy Market to supply customers. (Recommendation
8)
- PIAC recommends that the States and Territories be required to disclose the results of their audits of the energy efficiency of
their public housing stocks and the reports on the implementation of cost-effective upgrades. PIAC also recommends that
consideration is given to sourcing such information about residential tenancies and owner occupied housing and making it
publically available and accessible. (Recommendation 9)
- PIAC recommends that a wide-ranging consultation be undertaken to identify nationally significant datasets within the criminal
justice area. (Recommendation 10)
- PIAC recommends that the Australian Government commit to ensuring that state-based police forces, the Australian Federal
Police and any other relevant agencies be required to publish statistics regarding how many times Tasers have been used in the
jurisdiction, in all relevant modes, including the age and gender of the person on which it was used. (Recommendation 11)
- PIAC recommends that the Australian Government work with the states and territories to ensure consistent reporting regarding
self-harm incidents that occur in police and corrective services custody. (Recommendation 12)
- PIAC recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territory governments and relevant agencies to apply
the recommendations of the ERA (or similar measures) on a national basis across the corrections system. (Recommendation 13)
- PIAC endorses the recommendation of the Australian Human Rights Commission that the Australian Government should
expedite the ratification of OPCAT. (Recommendation 14)
- PIAC recommends that the Australian Government should encourage a culture of disclosure, with a specific focus on
departments engaging in national security or policing issues, at both a federal and state/territory level. (Recommendation 15)
9.8
Connected useful information: To open Government the Australian Government could release government- managed and
outsourced health and community services information through increased accessibility to both open and restricted data to drive
better ways to deliver services. There are examples of this overseas and in Australia (with the foundations already established)
Public Service Delivery
This would increase the transparency of government and promote the value of sharing information to deliver better outcomes for
the public.
Access to public information from different sources increases the opportunities for multi-disciplinary and cross-portfolio
approaches to address social problems
9.9 To achieve this:
Public Service Delivery
- need better data sharing (open data, interoperablity)
- develop single sign on, govt portal, that uses identity management - allows the individual to access information about
themselves, anywhere, anytime on any device. This would also allow govt to post specific information to individuals that are
relevant to them (could build on the My Gov system)
- specific projects in specific areas that identify (using data & qualitative methods such as ethnographies) to determine what
works, what doesn't, gaps etc and re-investment or reallocate money accordingly, and get out of initiatives that are not delivering
- co-design/co-create with local community based on above information
9.10 Create, manage and preserve information digitally to support transparency, accountability, citizen engagement and ongoing
access to, and re-use of, valuable government information: Commitment: The Australian Government will create, manage and
preserve information digitally to support transparency, accountability, citizen engagement and ongoing access to, and re-use of,
valuable government information.
Public Service Delivery
Meets principles: Transparency, Accountability, Public participation
Addresses Open Government Partnership Grand challenges: More Effectively Managing Public Resources
The creation, preservation and management of, and public access to, records and information is the cornerstone to transparency
and accountability in the Australian government. These records and information provide evidence of decisions and actions of the
Australian Government and are a unique source of information about the nature of the Commonwealth Government and its
activities. Without robust information management in government, there is no transparency or accountability, no evidence of
government decisions, and no protection of citizens’ rights and entitlements. Creating, preserving and managing these records
and information digitally not only supports business efficiencies but also encourages citizen engagement and timely access to,
and re-use of, Australian government information.
As the lead agency for information management in the Australian government, and the custodian of the most valuable
government records, the National Archives will continue to move Australian government agencies to digital information
management practices, implement strategies to support the ongoing preservation of, and timely access to, valuable digital
government information, and participate in legislative reforms to streamline access to government information by citizens.
9.10.1
9.11
Digital information management involves important shifts in our current law and practice regarding information access for
Public Service Delivery
example (and there are others) as Section 17 of the act stipulates, the current (since 1982) central focus on 'documents'. My
proposed review of FOI against modern internationally accepted best practice standards posted under Freedom of information
theme.
Mandatory APIs for all citizen and business facing services delivered or commissioned by government: Mandated open
Public Service Delivery
Application Programmable Interfaces (APIs) for all citizen and business facing services delivered or commissioned by
government, to comply to appropriately defined standards and security. This would enable different data, content and services to
be mashed up by agencies for better service delivery, but also enables an ecosystem of service delivery beyond government.
(Full blog post on my personal submission at http://pipka.org/2016/03/28/my-personal-ogpau-submission/)
9.11.1
9.11.2
9.12
9.13
9.14
Absolutely agree with APIs for citizens and business facing services or commissioned by government - This would open
Public Service Delivery
government by reducing the issues around "politics of data" where public service staff are cleaning up data to republish as open
data - which is in the end different to the information they are using for their business.
Public Service Delivery
brilliant! I completely agree. Without APIs, the whole Open Data concept can easily go down the drain. In fact, an API common to
all APS departments would be wonderful! Not sure if a common API is feasible though, but at least Department specific APIs
An open government plan in every government agency: Information policy and management
Public Service Delivery
Require each government agency to develop, publish and implement an open government plan based on the Principles on open
public sector information. (http://www.oaic.gov.au/information-policy/information-policy-resources/information-policy-agency-
resources/principles-on-open-public-sector-information)
Summary of Public Service teleconference 30/3/16. Seven people attended this call: Kevin, Maree, Ash, Des, Ken, Cameron and Public Service Delivery
I. We discussed actions suggested on this page. In response to the grand challenges / civic lab suggestion the group felt that
more data was required before these / and the effort contributed could be maximised. Civic spaces were discussed as physical
and online spaces and the need to leverage what's been done internationally and nationally was emphasised. The sustainability
and need for consistent funding of these kinds of initiatives was also discussed. Two-way mentoring, and the need for staff to be
given time to share lessons / build skills / have capacity for innovation was discussed briefly. The group felt a cultural shift would
be needed for the digital healthcare platforms suggested here, and that issues with the current e-health system should be
examined and addressed as this is explored further. The group largely supported API's, but felt a commitment and mandate
would be needed first with clear data standards and that their value should be determined before that commitment was made
(and evaluated) so they were sustainable. Amelia
The Australian government needs to deliver a simple, secure, inexpensive, and interconnected healthcare platform that enables Public Service Delivery
all stakeholders to coordinate effectively, regardless of their location/locale. This vendor neutral platform should enable auditable
collaboration across open, shared and linked data as well as permission-based cooperation around confidential data and
cost/service level transparency. Delivery of this platform will address the issues involved in providing an integrated healthcare
ecosystem to an ageing population across urban, suburban, rural and remote locations while also addressing the imperative to
lower costs and eliminate wastage due to systemic errors and inefficiencies.10.1
Improve public access to information and increase public participation: OGP category - Legislative Openness, Access to
Information, Open Data and Openness in Natural Resources areas
Resource Management
Suggestion:
To help better manage natural resources, the Government could improve transparency and community engagement by
proactively publishing useful information about extractive industry and energy projects. To make it easy for citizens and industry
to engage with natural resource development decisions, ensure open access to important information such as locations of
activities and environmental reports.
Successful implementation
This could be achieved by creating a single open, national platform for mining and resources project information that contains up-
to-date information about:
• the type of resource and project
• locations of proposed and current activity and infrastructure
• the decision-making process and applicable legislation
• status of projects
• links to public environmental and economic impact reporting
• company details
• links to community consultation events
Data and content on this platform will be available in a uniform, open, shareable format with permissible licences.
Context:
Most people don’t understand government and industry processes and rules. Information from government and industry is
siloed, lacks context and not written in plain english. Current delivery mechanisms rely on domain knowledge and specialised
software. Interrelated legislation is complex and varies by location. Company documentation and environmental reports are
difficult to access.
People feel they are not part of, and cannot contribute to, decisions relating to their community or projects of national
significance. When people do discover information either through the media or word of mouth, it is often too late to participate
and have an impact on decisions. Situations escalate and clashes occur.
10.2
Data management to assist Australia to meet its ‘Paris Agreement’ obligations: Executive Summary
Resource Management
There is a need to strengthen the amount and quality of information on climate change that is collected, published and monitored
for the Paris Climate Change Agreement. This is in harmony with Australia’s recent signature to the Open Government
Partnership (OGP) being a voluntary, multi-stakeholder, international initiative intended to “promote transparency, empower
citizens, fight corruption, and harness new technologies to strengthen governance”. The OGP Agreement explicitly requires each
country to “co-create a National Action Plan (NAP) with civil society.” It follows that members of civil society including individuals
and climate action organisations are expected to contribute to the NAP.
To assess compliance with the Paris Agreement, Australia must produce and publish information on:
• what is being done,
• how well it being done, and
• what more needs to be done.
Lead Agency: Department of Environment
10.3
10.4
1) Justification
Australia and all other countries at COP21 (December 2015) committed to the UNFCCC Paris Agreement. Fulfilment of the
provisions of the Agreement is necessary but not sufficient to avoid catastrophic climate change. The crucial importance of the
reduction in carbon emissions and the necessity of further action to keep global warming less than 20C above pre-industrial
levels, preferably no more than 1.50C, is clearly stated in the preamble to the Agreement itself (Appendix 1).
The Paris Agreement requires countries to create, collect and share knowledge needed to plan, implement and monitor action to
meet these global warming targets (Appendix 2). Australia, as one of the world’s leading sources of research and knowledge in
climate change, has both a domestic obligation and a duty to the international community to develop and use these resources for
the good of all.
Summary of Management of Resource teleconference 30/3/16. 10 people attended this teleconference: Ken, Kim, Michael,
Resource Management
Jessie, Ash, Brett, Mel, Mark, Tim and I. The group discussed the EITI, how it might be implemented by the Australian
Government and how it could improve transparency including disclosure of payments and company ownership, standards and
data release. This discussion included the need for legislative changes and a multi-stakeholder group / centralised approach to
meet EITI requirements. The group also felt that a centralised place for information about these kinds of resources and how they
were being used and managed across Australia was necessary and that companies might be encouraged or required to publish
data as well as open data from Government on this kind of platform. The group spoke to the need for increased access to open
data and data standards to enable this. Participants also spoke to the metrics and the need to look at more than those required
by the EITI/ transparency but also those that could support improved resource management in Australia and the measurement
and management of local social and environmental impacts. The importance of this data and these kinds of platforms for
transparency, to enable public participation and ensure accountability was emphasised. Amelia
Coal Seam Gas Requirements: o Triple bottom-line assessment of local, state and national costs and benefits of coal seam gas
production.
o A system for the fair and equitable distribution of revenues, royalties and benefits to affected landowners, constituencies,
states and territories.
o A system for reasonable prioritisation of Petroleum title allocation, with a focus on land fit for few alternative uses, and
minimised risk and disruption to the environment, aquifers, agricultural farmland, and local residents.
o Long-range environmental impact assessments and impact mitigation strategies for the development of existing and future
CSG export ports.
o An impact assessment, impact mitigation strategy and crisis management procedure addressing the significant increases in
tanker and bulk carrier traffic through The Great Barrier Reef. Considerations should include impacts on the environment and
other industries including fishing and tourism.
o Recommendations for suitable legislative changes to ensure socially and environmentally responsible current and future
development of this fledgling industry.
o A requirement that seams are tested for BTX prior to drilling.
(Note: these hydrocarbons are soluble in water...); that BTX containing areas are excluded from development.
• A revision to the PETROLEUM (ONSHORE) ACT 1991, enabling the better protection of landowner and locally affected
constituent interests. This may include a requirement of prior consultation and agreement from land owners and councils for the
temporary or permanent use of their properties and passageways for the purposes of CSG exploration and mining;
• A revision PETROLEUM (ONSHORE) ACT 1991 - SECT 47 ‘Application of Epis’, so that any holder of a Petroleum license are
subject to state or federal an environmental planning instruments as appropriate.
• The cessation of CSG development in populated areas.
• Cessation of CSG development in populated, prime agricultural and environmentally sensitive land and coastal areas until
effective and enforced regulation of this industry is introduced which ensures the long term, priority protection of the environment
and locally effected populations.
Resource Management
