****** 2.2 – Build and maintain public trust to address concerns about data
sharing ******
We will develop an ongoing and collaborative conversation with the community to
build public trust around data sharing and integration.
Objective
Australia will actively engage with the community regarding how public data is
being used to provide more targeted and effective policy, service delivery and
program evaluation.
Status Quo
In an increasingly complex and interconnected world, effective policy responses
require investment in joined-up data that can provide a strong evidence-base
for policy decisions.
The New Zealand Government has invested in both a whole-of-government
Integrated Data Infrastructure and enhanced analytical capability with positive
results in terms of reduced government spending and improved public policy
outcomes in areas such as human rights, law enforcement, health, education and
justice.
While the Australian Public Service (APS) has made some progress in this area,
we need to better inform the community about the benefits of data sharing and
address public concerns, including perceived values, risks, and attitudes
towards privacy.
The Privacy Act 1988 underpins the open data agenda and helps build public
trust in data-sharing activities. The Government has introduced a Bill to amend
the Act to make it an offence to deliberately re-identify personal information
from open government data.
Data literacy across the APS is also critical. In August 2016, the Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet released Data Skills and Capability in the
Australian Public Service to help build skills and knowledge in publishing,
linking and sharing public data.
Ambition
To build trust about the use of integrated data and actively respond to
community concerns about data sharing. To comply with international best
practice on open data principles and participate in global fora on data.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values of transparency and public
participation by:
    * providing greater transparency on how government is using the data it
      collects and protecting personal information;
    * enabling the community to engage with government and raise issues of
      concern;
    * enabling experts outside of government to inform public debate; and
    * providing more targeted and effective policy, service delivery and
      program evaluation.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * Improving Public Services
    * Increasing Public Integrity
Timeframes
December 2016 – End 2017
Lead agency
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Australian Bureau of Statistics
and Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
Other actors involved
Government:  Attorney General’s Department, Treasury, Fair Work Ombudsman,
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, Department of Social Services,
Department of Industry, Innovation and Science and Department of Health,
Department of Human Services, Australian Taxation Office and Australian Federal
Police
Non-government: Open Data Institute Queensland and digital rights organisation
Milestones
   1. Adopt the International Open Data Charter.
          o December 2016 – Early 2017
   2. Establish an expert panel to advise government and to help communicate
      value and utility of data sharing and integration.
          o December 2016 – Mid 2017
   3. Develop an engagement process to demonstrate public-value examples and
      enable an ongoing dialogue with the community.
          o December 2016 – End 2017
   4. Work with the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner to
      improve privacy risk management capability across the Australian Public
      Service.
          o November 2016 – Ongoing
   5. Participate in the International Open Data Stewards Group.
          o Ongoing
   6. Responsive, targeted and ongoing engagement regarding public data use and
      integration.
          o Ongoing

[ a govspace site ]
