****** 3.3 – Improve the discoverability and accessibility of government data
and information ******
We will make it easier for the public to find and use government data and
information through central portals and digital platforms.
Objective
Australia will establish platforms and tools to improve the discoverability and
accessibility of government information and public data.
Status Quo
The creation, preservation, management and public use of government information
is fundamental to open and transparent government. The availability of
government records and data improves public access to information, while also
driving efficient business outcomes by facilitating use and reuse of these
valuable resources.
It is not enough just to make these resources open; information and public data
must be easy to find and accessible in order for it to be useful. Some specific
examples of areas where the government is seeking to improve public access to
information include:
    * Public data: Data.gov.au is the Australian Government’s open data
      platform. It has enabled the open release of over 20,000 public resources
      used to grow the economy, improve service delivery and transform policy
      outcomes for the nation. As the number of datasets on data.gov.au grows,
      Australia’s public data infrastructure needs be upgraded to meet the
      demands of data users. This includes improving search and discovery,
      enhancing support for collaboration, developing a quality framework to
      assist publishers, and developing more robust publishing processes.
    * Grants: There is no central point to identify and apply for Australian
      Government grant opportunities and find consolidated information about
      grants awarded. The Department of Finance is building GrantConnect, a
      central whole-of-government system that will forecast and publish grant
      opportunities, automatically notify public users of grant opportunities
      of interest, and publish information on grants awarded.
    * Corporate and administrative reporting: Corporate and administrative
      reporting information is currently located on individual agency websites
      or in hard copy, making it difficult to compare and contrast documents.
      The Department of Finance and the Department of the Prime Minister and
      Cabinet are working with the Digital Transformation Agency to make
      reporting information more discoverable and accessible through the
      digitisation of this information.
    * Archived records: The most significant records of the Australian
      Government are held by the National Archives of Australia. To facilitate
      citizens’ access to these records through digital and online channels,
      the Archives will continue to lead the transition from paper to digital
      information practices in Australian Government agencies, digitise paper
      records of high research value and increase the number of records
      available for public access.
    * Environmental information: The Department of the Environment and Energy
      compiles significant data to produce its State of the Environment report
      and meet its other responsibilities (such as research into the impacts of
      coal and coal seam gas developments on ground water). The Department will
      make the 2017 State of the Environment report and its underlying data
      more accessible through SoE Digital (an innovative and interactive online
      platform) and data.gov.au. It will use data visualisation tools to help
      publish the results of its coal and coal seam gas bioregional
      assessments.
Ambition
To make it as easy as possible to find, access and use government information
and data.
Relevance
This commitment will advance the OGP values of access to information and
technology and innovation by:
    * promoting a consistent approach to information governance across
      Australian Government entities;
    * increasing transparency of government decision-making and policy
      development;
    * enabling information and data reuse for economic and social benefits;
    * protecting the rights and entitlements of Australians to access
      government information;
    * increasing the accessibility, usability and discoverability of public
      data; and
    * improving the quality of data.
OGP Grand Challenge
    * Improving Public Services
    * Increasing Public Integrity
    * More Effectively Managing Public Resources
Timeframes
Mid 2016 – Mid 2018
Lead agency
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (PM&C), Department of Finance
(Finance), National Archives of Australia (Archives) and Department of the
Environment and Energy (DoEE)
Other actors involved
Government: All Commonwealth entities
Non-government: Data61
Milestones
   1. PM&C to work with Data61 to conduct research and discovery into data
      consumption (to better understand user behaviours and needs) and
      publishing (to improve quality, timeliness and value of published data).
          o Mid 2016 – Mid 2017
   2. PM&C to work with Data61 to create, circulate and gather feedback on
      design concepts and prototypes for improved search functionality and user
      experience on the data.gov.au platform.
          o Late 2016 – Late 2017
   3. Finance to implement Phase One of the GrantConnect platform to enable
      public users to: register to receive notifications on grant opportunities
      that match their self-defined profiles; watch forecast opportunities as
      they move from planning to requests for applications; and access grant
      guidelines for each opportunity and be notified about changes to grants
      processes.
          o Late 2016 – Late 2017
   4. Finance to launch the pilot of the digital corporate and administrative
      reporting platform.
          o Late 2016 – Late 2017
   5. Archives to lead the transition to digital information practices in
      Australian Government agencies to ensure robust information governance
      and report to the Prime Minister in 2018.
          o Mid 2016 – Late 2018
   6. Archives to increase the number of archival records available in digital
      formats, including World War II service and passenger arrival records.
          o Mid 2016 – Late 2018
   7. Archives to make additional groups of archival records of high research
      interest available for public access.
          o Mid 2016 – Late 2018
   8. PM&C to deliver live platform elements for data.gov.au, including
      integration with NationalMap to provide a more efficient workflow for the
      publishing and discovery of spatial data.
          o Early 2017 – Late 2017
   9. PM&C to design and prototype further data.gov.au platform capabilities,
      including: functionality to promote examples and collaboration using
      public data; and integration with other platforms for open data projects
      and third party open data platforms.
          o Early 2017 – Mid 2018
  10. DoEE to launch a map-based tool to visualise Bioregional Assessment
      results.
          o Early 2017 – June 2017
  11. DoEE to publish the State of the Environment report through an online
      information publishing and reporting platform and release the underlying
      data on data.gov.au.
          o November 2016 – February/March 2017

[ a govspace site ]
